<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Prologue</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:poem">
		<section id="prologue" epub:type="prologue">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Prologue</h2>
			<p>
				<span>When that Aprilis, with his showers swoot,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The drought of March hath pierced to the root,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bathed every vein in such licóur,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of which virtúe engender’d is the flower;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Zephyrus eke with his swootë breath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inspired hath in every holt<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a> and heath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tender croppës,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a> and the youngë sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath in the Ram<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a> his halfë course y-run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And smallë fowlës makë melody,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That sleepen all the night with open eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(So pricketh them natúre in their coráges<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a>);</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then longë folk to go on pilgrimages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And palmers<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a> for to seekë strangë strands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To fernë hallows couth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7" id="noteref-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a> in sundry lands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And specially, from every shirë’s end</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Engleland, to Canterbury they wend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The holy blissful Martyr for to seek,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That them hath holpen, when that they were sick.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Befell that, in that season on a day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Southwark at the Tabard<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8" id="noteref-8" epub:type="noteref">8</a> as I lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ready to wenden on my pilgrimage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Canterbury with devout coráge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At night was come into that hostelry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well nine and twenty in a company</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sundry folk, by áventure y-fall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In fellowship,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-9" id="noteref-9" epub:type="noteref">9</a> and pilgrims were they all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That toward Canterbury wouldë ride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chamber, and the stables werë wide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And well we weren eased at the best.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-10" id="noteref-10" epub:type="noteref">10</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shortly, when the sunnë was to rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So had I spoken with them every one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I was of their fellowship anon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And madë forword<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-11" id="noteref-11" epub:type="noteref">11</a> early for to rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take our way there as I you devise.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-12" id="noteref-12" epub:type="noteref">12</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But natheless, while I have time and space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere that I farther in this talë pace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Me thinketh it accordant to reasón,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tell you allë the condition</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of each of them, so as it seemed me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And which they weren, and of what degree;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eke in what array that they were in:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at a Knight then will I first begin.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A <b>Knight</b> there was, and that a worthy man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That from the timë that he first began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To riden out, he loved chivalry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Truth and honoúr, freedom and courtesy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full worthy was he in his Lordë’s war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thereto had he ridden, no man farre,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-13" id="noteref-13" epub:type="noteref">13</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>As well in Christendom as in Heatheness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever honour’d for his worthiness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Alisandre<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-14" id="noteref-14" epub:type="noteref">14</a> he was when it was won.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full often time he had the board begun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above allë natións in Prusse.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-15" id="noteref-15" epub:type="noteref">15</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Lettowe had he reysed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-16" id="noteref-16" epub:type="noteref">16</a> and in Russe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No Christian man so oft of his degree.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Grenade at the siege eke had he be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Algesir,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-17" id="noteref-17" epub:type="noteref">17</a> and ridden in Belmarie.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-18" id="noteref-18" epub:type="noteref">18</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Leyës was he, and at Satalie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When they were won; and in the Greatë Sea<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-19" id="noteref-19" epub:type="noteref">19</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>At many a noble army had he be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At mortal battles had he been fifteen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And foughten for our faith at Tramissene.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-20" id="noteref-20" epub:type="noteref">20</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>In listës thriës, and aye slain his foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This ilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-21" id="noteref-21" epub:type="noteref">21</a> worthy knight had been also</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some timë with the lord of Palatie,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-22" id="noteref-22" epub:type="noteref">22</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against another heathen in Turkie:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And evermore he had a sovereign price.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-23" id="noteref-23" epub:type="noteref">23</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though that he was worthy he was wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of his port as meek as is a maid.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He never yet no villainy<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-24" id="noteref-24" epub:type="noteref">24</a> ne said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all his life, unto no manner wight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was a very perfect gentle knight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But for to tellë you of his array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His horse was good, but yet he was not gay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fustian he weared a gipon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Allë besmotter’d with his habergeon,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-25" id="noteref-25" epub:type="noteref">25</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he was late y-come from his voyáge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wentë for to do his pilgrimage.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>With him there was his son, a youngë <b>Squire</b>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lover, and a lusty bacheler,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With lockës crulle<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-26" id="noteref-26" epub:type="noteref">26</a> as they were laid in press.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of twenty year of age he was I guess.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his statúre he was of even length,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wonderly deliver,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-27" id="noteref-27" epub:type="noteref">27</a> and great of strength.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he had been some time in chevachie,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-28" id="noteref-28" epub:type="noteref">28</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Flanders, in Artois, and Picardie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And borne him well, as of so little space,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-29" id="noteref-29" epub:type="noteref">29</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>In hope to standen in his lady’s grace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Embroider’d was he, as it were a mead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All full of freshë flowers, white and red.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing he was, or fluting all the day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was as fresh as is the month of May.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Short was his gown, with sleevës long and wide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well could he sit on horse, and fairë ride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He couldë songës make, and well indite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joust, and eke dance, and well pourtray and write.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So hot he loved, that by nightertale<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-30" id="noteref-30" epub:type="noteref">30</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>He slept no more than doth the nightingale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Courteous he was, lowly, and serviceable,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And carv’d before his father at the table.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-31" id="noteref-31" epub:type="noteref">31</a></span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>A <b>Yeoman</b> had he, and servánts no mo’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At that timë, for him list ridë so;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-32" id="noteref-32" epub:type="noteref">32</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he was clad in coat and hood of green.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sheaf of peacock arrows<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-33" id="noteref-33" epub:type="noteref">33</a> bright and keen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under his belt he bare full thriftily.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well could he dress his tackle yeomanly:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His arrows drooped not with feathers low;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in his hand he bare a mighty bow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A nut-head<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-34" id="noteref-34" epub:type="noteref">34</a> had he, with a brown viságe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wood-craft coud<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-35" id="noteref-35" epub:type="noteref">35</a> he well all the uságe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his arm he bare a gay bracér,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-36" id="noteref-36" epub:type="noteref">36</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by his side a sword and a bucklér,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on that other side a gay daggere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Harnessed well, and sharp as point of spear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Christopher<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-37" id="noteref-37" epub:type="noteref">37</a> on his breast of silver sheen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An horn he bare, the baldric was of green:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A forester<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-38" id="noteref-38" epub:type="noteref">38</a> was he soothly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-39" id="noteref-39" epub:type="noteref">39</a> as I guess.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>There was also a Nun, a <b>Prioress</b>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That of her smiling was full simple and coy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her greatest oathë was but by Saint Loy;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-40" id="noteref-40" epub:type="noteref">40</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she was cleped<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-41" id="noteref-41" epub:type="noteref">41</a> Madame Eglentine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full well she sang the servicë divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entuned in her nose full seemëly;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-42" id="noteref-42" epub:type="noteref">42</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And French she spake full fair and fetisly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-43" id="noteref-43" epub:type="noteref">43</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the school of Stratford attë Bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For French of Paris was to her unknow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At meatë was she well y-taught withal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She let no morsel from her lippës fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor wet her fingers in her saucë deep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well could she carry a morsel, and well keep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That no droppë ne fell upon her breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In courtesy was set full much her lest.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-44" id="noteref-44" epub:type="noteref">44</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her over-lippë wiped she so clean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in her cup there was no farthing<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-45" id="noteref-45" epub:type="noteref">45</a> seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of greasë, when she drunken had her draught;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full seemëly after her meat she raught:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-46" id="noteref-46" epub:type="noteref">46</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sickerly she was of great disport,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-47" id="noteref-47" epub:type="noteref">47</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And full pleasánt, and amiable of port,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pained her to counterfeitë cheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of court,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-48" id="noteref-48" epub:type="noteref">48</a> and be estately of mannére,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to be holden digne<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-49" id="noteref-49" epub:type="noteref">49</a> of reverence.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But for to speaken of her consciénce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She was so charitable and so pitous,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-50" id="noteref-50" epub:type="noteref">50</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>She wouldë weep if that she saw a mouse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caught in a trap, if it were dead or bled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of smallë houndës had she, that she fed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With roasted flesh, and milk, and wastel bread.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-51" id="noteref-51" epub:type="noteref">51</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>But sore she wept if one of them were dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or if men smote it with a yardë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-52" id="noteref-52" epub:type="noteref">52</a> smart:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all was conscience and tender heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full seemly her wimple y-pinched was;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her nose tretis;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-53" id="noteref-53" epub:type="noteref">53</a> her eyen gray as glass;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-54" id="noteref-54" epub:type="noteref">54</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her mouth full small, and thereto soft and red;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But sickerly she had a fair forehéad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was almost a spannë broad I trow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For hardily she was not undergrow.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-55" id="noteref-55" epub:type="noteref">55</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full fetis<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-56" id="noteref-56" epub:type="noteref">56</a> was her cloak, as I was ware.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of small corál about her arm she bare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A pair of beadës, gauded all with green;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-57" id="noteref-57" epub:type="noteref">57</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thereon hung a brooch of gold full sheen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On which was first y-written a crown’d A,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after, <i xml:lang="la">Amor vincit omnia</i>.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another <b>Nun</b> also with her had she,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>[That was her chapelléine, and <b>Priestës</b> three.]</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>A <b>Monk</b> there was, a fair for the mast’ry,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-58" id="noteref-58" epub:type="noteref">58</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span id="prologue-line-166">An out-rider, that loved venery;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-59" id="noteref-59" epub:type="noteref">59</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>A manly man, to be an abbot able.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full many a dainty horse had he in stable:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when he rode, men might his bridle hear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jingeling<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-60" id="noteref-60" epub:type="noteref">60</a> in a whistling wind as clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eke as loud, as doth the chapel bell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There as this lord was keeper of the cell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rule of Saint Maur and of Saint Benet,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-61" id="noteref-61" epub:type="noteref">61</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Because that it was old and somedeal<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-62" id="noteref-62" epub:type="noteref">62</a> strait,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This ilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-63" id="noteref-63" epub:type="noteref">63</a> monk let oldë thingës pace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And held after the newë world the trace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gave not of the text a pulled hen,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-64" id="noteref-64" epub:type="noteref">64</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That saith, that hunters be not holy men;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ne that a monk, when he is cloisterless;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is like to a fish that is waterless;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is to say, a monk out of his cloister.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This ilkë text held he not worth an oyster;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I say his opinion was good.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why should he study, and make himselfë wood,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-65" id="noteref-65" epub:type="noteref">65</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a book in cloister always pore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or swinken<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-66" id="noteref-66" epub:type="noteref">66</a> with his handës, and laboúr,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Austin bit?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-67" id="noteref-67" epub:type="noteref">67</a> how shall the world be served?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let Austin have his swink to him reserved.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore he was a prickasour aright:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-68" id="noteref-68" epub:type="noteref">68</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greyhounds he had as swift as fowl of flight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of pricking<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-69" id="noteref-69" epub:type="noteref">69</a> and of hunting for the hare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was all his lust,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-70" id="noteref-70" epub:type="noteref">70</a> for no cost would he spare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw his sleevës purfil’d at the hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With gris,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-71" id="noteref-71" epub:type="noteref">71</a> and that the finest of the land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for to fasten his hood under his chin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had of gold y-wrought a curious pin:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A love-knot in the greater end there was.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His head was bald, and shone as any glass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eke his face, as it had been anoint;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was a lord full fat and in good point;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyen steep,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-72" id="noteref-72" epub:type="noteref">72</a> and rolling in his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That steamed as a furnace of a lead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His bootës supple, his horse in great estate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now certainly he was a fair preláte;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was not pale as a forpined<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-73" id="noteref-73" epub:type="noteref">73</a> ghost;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fat swan lov’d he best of any roast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His palfrey was as brown as is a berry.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>A <b>Friar</b> there was, a wanton and a merry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A limitour,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-74" id="noteref-74" epub:type="noteref">74</a> a full solemnë man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all the orders four is none that can<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-75" id="noteref-75" epub:type="noteref">75</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>So much of dalliance and fair languáge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had y-made full many a marriáge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of youngë women, at his owen cost.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto his order he was a noble post;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full well belov’d, and familiár was he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With franklins over all<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-76" id="noteref-76" epub:type="noteref">76</a> in his countrý,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eke with worthy women of the town:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he had power of confessión,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As said himselfë, more than a curáte,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For of his order he was licentiate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full sweetëly heard he confession,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pleasant was his absolution.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was an easy man to give penánce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There as he wist to have a good pittánce:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-77" id="noteref-77" epub:type="noteref">77</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For unto a poor order for to give</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is signë that a man is well y-shrive.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-78" id="noteref-78" epub:type="noteref">78</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For if he gave, he durstë make avant,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-79" id="noteref-79" epub:type="noteref">79</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wistë that the man was repentant.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For many a man so hard is of his heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He may not weep although him sorë smart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore instead of weeping and prayéres,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men must give silver to the poorë freres.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His tippet was aye farsed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-80" id="noteref-80" epub:type="noteref">80</a> full of knives,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pinnës, for to give to fairë wives;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And certainly he had a merry note:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well could he sing and playen on a rote;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-81" id="noteref-81" epub:type="noteref">81</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of yeddings<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-82" id="noteref-82" epub:type="noteref">82</a> he bare utterly the prize.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His neck was white as is the fleur-de-lis.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereto he strong was as a champion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knew well the tavérns in every town.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every hosteler and gay tapstére,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better than a lazar<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-83" id="noteref-83" epub:type="noteref">83</a> or a beggére,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For unto such a worthy man as he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Accordeth not, as by his faculty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To havë with such lazars acquaintánce.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is not honest, it may not advance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As for to dealë with no such pouraille,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-84" id="noteref-84" epub:type="noteref">84</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all with rich, and sellers of vitaille.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ov’r all there as<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-85" id="noteref-85" epub:type="noteref">85</a> profit should arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Courteous he was, and lowly of servíce;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There n’as no man nowhere<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-86" id="noteref-86" epub:type="noteref">86</a> so virtuous.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was the bestë beggar in all his house:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave a certain farmë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-87" id="noteref-87" epub:type="noteref">87</a> for the grant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None of his bretheren came in his haunt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For though a widow haddë but one shoe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So pleasant was his <i xml:lang="la">In principio</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-88" id="noteref-88" epub:type="noteref">88</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet would he have a farthing ere he went;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His purchase was well better than his rent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rage he could and play as any whelp,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In lovëdays;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-89" id="noteref-89" epub:type="noteref">89</a> there could he muchel help.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-90" id="noteref-90" epub:type="noteref">90</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For there was he not like a cloisterer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With threadbare cope, as is a poor scholer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he was like a master or a pope.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of double worsted was his semicope,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-91" id="noteref-91" epub:type="noteref">91</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That rounded was as a bell out of press.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Somewhat he lisped for his wantonness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make his English sweet upon his tongue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in his harping, when that he had sung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyen twinkled in his head aright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As do the starrës in a frosty night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This worthy limitour was call’d Hubérd.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>A <b>Merchant</b> was there with a forked beard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In motley, and high on his horse he sat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his head a Flandrish beaver hat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His bootës clasped fair and fetisly.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-92" id="noteref-92" epub:type="noteref">92</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>His reasons aye spake he full solemnly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sounding alway th’ increase of his winning.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He would the sea were kept<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-93" id="noteref-93" epub:type="noteref">93</a> for any thing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betwixtë Middleburg and Orëwell.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-94" id="noteref-94" epub:type="noteref">94</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well could he in exchangë shieldës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-95" id="noteref-95" epub:type="noteref">95</a> sell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This worthy man full well his wit beset;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-96" id="noteref-96" epub:type="noteref">96</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>There wistë no wight that he was in debt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So estately was he of governance<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-97" id="noteref-97" epub:type="noteref">97</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his bargáins, and with his chevisance.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-98" id="noteref-98" epub:type="noteref">98</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For sooth he was a worthy man withal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But sooth to say, I n’ot<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-99" id="noteref-99" epub:type="noteref">99</a> how men him call.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>A <b>Clerk</b> there was of Oxenford<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-100" id="noteref-100" epub:type="noteref">100</a> also,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That unto logic haddë long y-go.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-101" id="noteref-101" epub:type="noteref">101</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>As leanë was his horse as is a rake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he was not right fat, I undertake;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But looked hollow,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-102" id="noteref-102" epub:type="noteref">102</a> and thereto soberly.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-103" id="noteref-103" epub:type="noteref">103</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full threadbare was his overest courtepy,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-104" id="noteref-104" epub:type="noteref">104</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he had gotten him yet no benefice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ne was not worldly, to have an office.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For him was lever<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-105" id="noteref-105" epub:type="noteref">105</a> have at his bed’s head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twenty bookës, clothed in black or red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Aristotle, and his philosophy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than robës rich, or fiddle, or psalt’ry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all be that he was a philosópher,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet haddë he but little gold in coffer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all that he might of his friendës hent,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-106" id="noteref-106" epub:type="noteref">106</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>On bookës and on learning he it spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And busily gan for the soulës pray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of them that gave him wherewith to scholay.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-107" id="noteref-107" epub:type="noteref">107</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of study took he mostë care and heed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not one word spake he morë than was need;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that was said in form and reverence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And short and quick, and full of high senténce.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sounding in moral virtue was his speech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gladly would he learn, and gladly teach.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>A <b>Sergeant of the Law</b>, wary and wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That often had y-been at the Parvis,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-108" id="noteref-108" epub:type="noteref">108</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was also, full rich of excellence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Discreet he was, and of great reverence:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He seemed such, his wordës were so wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Justice he was full often in assize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By patent, and by plein<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-109" id="noteref-109" epub:type="noteref">109</a> commission;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For his sciénce, and for his high renown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fees and robës had he many one.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So great a purchaser was nowhere none.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All was fee simple to him, in effect</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His purchasing might not be in suspect.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-110" id="noteref-110" epub:type="noteref">110</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nowhere so busy a man as he there was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet he seemed busier than he was.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In termës had he case’ and doomës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-111" id="noteref-111" epub:type="noteref">111</a> all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That from the time of King <abbr>Will.</abbr> werë fall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereto he could indite, and make a thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There couldë no wight pinch at his writing.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-112" id="noteref-112" epub:type="noteref">112</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every statute coud<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-113" id="noteref-113" epub:type="noteref">113</a> he plain by rote.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rode but homely in a medley<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-114" id="noteref-114" epub:type="noteref">114</a> coat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Girt with a seint<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-115" id="noteref-115" epub:type="noteref">115</a> of silk, with barrës small;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his array tell I no longer tale.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>A <b>Frankëlin</b><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-116" id="noteref-116" epub:type="noteref">116</a> was in this company;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White was his beard, as is the daïsy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his complexión he was sanguíne.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well lov’d he in the morn a sop in wine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To liven in delight was ever his won,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-117" id="noteref-117" epub:type="noteref">117</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he was Epicurus’ owen son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That held opinion, that plein<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-118" id="noteref-118" epub:type="noteref">118</a> delight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was verily felicity perfíte.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An householder, and that a great, was he;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saint Julian<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-119" id="noteref-119" epub:type="noteref">119</a> he was in his countrý.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His bread, his ale, was alway after one;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-120" id="noteref-120" epub:type="noteref">120</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>A better envined<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-121" id="noteref-121" epub:type="noteref">121</a> man was nowhere none;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withouten bake-meat never was his house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fish and flesh, and that so plentëous,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It snowed in his house of meat and drink,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of allë dainties that men couldë think.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the sundry seasons of the year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So changed he his meat and his soupére.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full many a fat partridge had he in mew,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-122" id="noteref-122" epub:type="noteref">122</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And many a bream, and many a luce in stew.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-123" id="noteref-123" epub:type="noteref">123</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woe was his cook, but if<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-124" id="noteref-124" epub:type="noteref">124</a> his saucë were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Poignant and sharp, and ready all his gear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His table dormant<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-125" id="noteref-125" epub:type="noteref">125</a> in his hall alway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood ready cover’d all the longë day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At sessions there was he lord and sire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full often time he was knight of the shire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An anlace, and a gipciere<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-126" id="noteref-126" epub:type="noteref">126</a> all of silk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hung at his girdle, white as morning milk.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sheriff had he been, and a countour.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-127" id="noteref-127" epub:type="noteref">127</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was nowhere such a worthy vavasour.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-128" id="noteref-128" epub:type="noteref">128</a></span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>An <b>Haberdasher</b>, and a <b>Carpenter</b>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A <b>Webbe</b>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-129" id="noteref-129" epub:type="noteref">129</a> a <b>Dyer</b>, and a <b>Tapiser</b>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-130" id="noteref-130" epub:type="noteref">130</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were with us eke, cloth’d in one livery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a solémn and great fraternity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full fresh and new their gear y-picked<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-131" id="noteref-131" epub:type="noteref">131</a> was.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their knivës were y-chaped<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-132" id="noteref-132" epub:type="noteref">132</a> not with brass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all with silver wrought full clean and well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their girdles and their pouches every deal.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-133" id="noteref-133" epub:type="noteref">133</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well seemed each of them a fair burgéss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To sitten in a guild-hall, on the dais.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-134" id="noteref-134" epub:type="noteref">134</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evereach, for the wisdom that he can,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-135" id="noteref-135" epub:type="noteref">135</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was shapely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-136" id="noteref-136" epub:type="noteref">136</a> for to be an alderman.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For chattels haddë they enough and rent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eke their wivës would it well assent:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ellës certain they had been to blame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is full fair to be y-clep’d madáme,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for to go to vigils all before,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And have a mantle royally y-bore.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-137" id="noteref-137" epub:type="noteref">137</a></span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>A <b>Cook</b> they haddë with them for the nones,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-138" id="noteref-138" epub:type="noteref">138</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>To boil the chickens and the marrow bones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And powder merchant tart and galingale.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-139" id="noteref-139" epub:type="noteref">139</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well could he know a draught of London ale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He couldë roast, and seethe, and broil, and fry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makë mortrewës,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-140" id="noteref-140" epub:type="noteref">140</a> and well bake a pie.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But great harm was it, as it thoughtë me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, on his shin a mormal<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-141" id="noteref-141" epub:type="noteref">141</a> haddë he.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For blanc manger,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-142" id="noteref-142" epub:type="noteref">142</a> that made he with the best.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>A <b>Shipman</b> was there, wonned far by West:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-143" id="noteref-143" epub:type="noteref">143</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ought I wot, be was of Dartëmouth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rode upon a rouncy, as he couth,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-144" id="noteref-144" epub:type="noteref">144</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>All in a gown of falding<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-145" id="noteref-145" epub:type="noteref">145</a> to the knee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A dagger hanging by a lace had he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About his neck under his arm adown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hot summer had made his hue all brown;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And certainly he was a good felláw.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full many a draught of wine he had y-draw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Bourdeaux-ward, while that the chapmen sleep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of nicë consciénce took he no keep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If that he fought, and had the higher hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By water he sent them home to every land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But of his craft to reckon well his tides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His streamës and his strandës him besides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His herberow,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-146" id="noteref-146" epub:type="noteref">146</a> his moon, and lodemanage,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-147" id="noteref-147" epub:type="noteref">147</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was none such, from Hull unto Carthage.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hardy he was, and wise, I undertake:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With many a tempest had his beard been shake.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knew well all the havens, as they were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Scotland to the Cape of Finisterre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every creek in Bretagne and in Spain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His barge y-cleped was the Magdelain.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>With us there was a <b>Doctor of Physic</b>;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all this worldë was there none him like</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To speak of physic, and of surgery:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he was grounded in astronomy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He kept his patiént a full great deal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In hourës by his magic natural.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well could he fortunë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-148" id="noteref-148" epub:type="noteref">148</a> the áscendent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his imáges for his patiént.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He knew the cause of every malady,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were it of cold, or hot, or moist, or dry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And where engender’d, and of what humoúr.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was a very perfect practisour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cause y-know,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-149" id="noteref-149" epub:type="noteref">149</a> and of his harm the root,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anon he gave to the sick man his boot.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-150" id="noteref-150" epub:type="noteref">150</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full ready had he his apothecaries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To send his druggës and his lectuaries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For each of them made other for to win:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their friendship was not newë to begin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well knew he the old Esculapius,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Dioscorides, and eke Rufus;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old Hippocras, Hali, and Gallien;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Serapion, Rasis, and Avicen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Averrois, Damascene, and Constantin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bernard, and Gatisden, and Gilbertin.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-151" id="noteref-151" epub:type="noteref">151</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his diet measúrable was he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For it was of no superfluity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But of great nourishing, and digestible.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His study was but little on the Bible.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sanguine and in perse<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-152" id="noteref-152" epub:type="noteref">152</a> he clad was, all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lined with taffeta, and with sendall.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-153" id="noteref-153" epub:type="noteref">153</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet he was but easy of dispence:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He kept that he won in the pestilence.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-154" id="noteref-154" epub:type="noteref">154</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For gold in physic is a cordial;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore he loved gold in special.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>A good <b>Wife</b> was there <b>of</b> besidë <b>Bath</b>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But she was somedeal deaf, and that was scath.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-155" id="noteref-155" epub:type="noteref">155</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of cloth-making she haddë such an haunt,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-156" id="noteref-156" epub:type="noteref">156</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>She passed them of Ypres, and of Gaunt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all the parish wifë was there none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That to the off’ring<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-157" id="noteref-157" epub:type="noteref">157</a> before her should gon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if there did, certain so wroth was she,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That she was out of allë charity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her coverchiefs<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-158" id="noteref-158" epub:type="noteref">158</a> werë full fine of ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I durstë swear, they weighedë ten pound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That on the Sunday were upon her head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her hosen weren of fine scarlet red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full strait y-tied, and shoes full moist<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-159" id="noteref-159" epub:type="noteref">159</a> and new.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bold was her face, and fair and red of hue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She was a worthy woman all her live,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Husbands at the church door had she had five,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withouten other company in youth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thereof needeth not to speak as nouth.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-160" id="noteref-160" epub:type="noteref">160</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thrice had she been at Jerusalem;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She haddë passed many a strangë stream;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Rome she had been, and at Bologne,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-161" id="noteref-161" epub:type="noteref">161</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Galice at Saint James,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-162" id="noteref-162" epub:type="noteref">162</a> and at Cologne;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She coudë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-163" id="noteref-163" epub:type="noteref">163</a> much of wand’ring by the way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gat-toothed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-164" id="noteref-164" epub:type="noteref">164</a> was she, soothly for to say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon an ambler easily she sat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Y-wimpled well, and on her head an hat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As broad as is a buckler or a targe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A foot-mantle about her hippës large,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on her feet a pair of spurrës sharp.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In fellowship well could she laugh and carp.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-165" id="noteref-165" epub:type="noteref">165</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of remedies of love she knew perchance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For of that art she coud<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-166" id="noteref-166" epub:type="noteref">166</a> the oldë dance.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>A good man there was of religión,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That was a poorë <b>Parson</b> of a town:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But rich he was of holy thought and werk:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-167" id="noteref-167" epub:type="noteref">167</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was also a learned man, a clerk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Christë’s gospel truly wouldë preach.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His parishens devoutly would he teach.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Benign he was, and wonder diligent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in adversity full patient:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And such he was y-proved often sithes.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-168" id="noteref-168" epub:type="noteref">168</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full loth were him to cursë for his tithes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But rather would he given out of doubt,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto his poorë parishens about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his off’ring, and eke of his substánce.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He could in little thing have suffisance.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-169" id="noteref-169" epub:type="noteref">169</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wide was his parish, and houses far asunder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he ne left not, for no rain nor thunder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sickness and in mischief to visit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The farthest in his parish, much and lit,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-170" id="noteref-170" epub:type="noteref">170</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his feet, and in his hand a staff.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This noble ensample to his sheep he gaf,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-171" id="noteref-171" epub:type="noteref">171</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That first he wrought, and afterward he taught.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the gospel he the wordës caught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this figúre he added yet thereto,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That if gold rustë, what should iron do?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For if a priest be foul, on whom we trust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No wonder is a lewëd<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-172" id="noteref-172" epub:type="noteref">172</a> man to rust:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shame it is, if that a priest take keep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see a shitten shepherd and clean sheep:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well ought a priest ensample for to give,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By his own cleanness, how his sheep should live.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He settë not his benefice to hire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And left his sheep eucumber’d in the mire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span id="prologue-line-511">And ran unto London, unto Saint Poul’s,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To seekë him a chantery<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-173" id="noteref-173" epub:type="noteref">173</a> for souls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or with a brotherhood to be withold:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-174" id="noteref-174" epub:type="noteref">174</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>But dwelt at home, and keptë well his fold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that the wolf ne made it not miscarry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was a shepherd, and no mercenary.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though he holy were, and virtuous,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was to sinful men not dispitous<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-175" id="noteref-175" epub:type="noteref">175</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor of his speechë dangerous nor dign,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-176" id="noteref-176" epub:type="noteref">176</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in his teaching díscreet and benign.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To drawen folk to heaven, with fairness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By good ensample, was his business:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it were<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-177" id="noteref-177" epub:type="noteref">177</a> any person obstinate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What so he were of high or low estate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him would he snibbë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-178" id="noteref-178" epub:type="noteref">178</a> sharply for the nonës.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-179" id="noteref-179" epub:type="noteref">179</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>A better priest I trow that nowhere none is.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He waited after no pomp nor reverence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor maked him a spiced consciénce,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-180" id="noteref-180" epub:type="noteref">180</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Christë’s lore, and his apostles’ twelve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He taught, and first he follow’d it himselve.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>With him there was a <b>Ploughman</b>, was his brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That had y-laid of dung full many a fother.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-181" id="noteref-181" epub:type="noteref">181</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>A true swinker<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-182" id="noteref-182" epub:type="noteref">182</a> and a good was he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Living in peace and perfect charity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God loved he bestë with all his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At allë timës, were it gain or smart,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-183" id="noteref-183" epub:type="noteref">183</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then his neighëbour right as himselve.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wouldë thresh, and thereto dike,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-184" id="noteref-184" epub:type="noteref">184</a> and delve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Christë’s sake, for every poorë wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withouten hire, if it lay in his might.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His tithës payed he full fair and well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both of his proper swink, and his chattel.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-185" id="noteref-185" epub:type="noteref">185</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a tabard<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-186" id="noteref-186" epub:type="noteref">186</a> he rode upon a mare.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There was also a Reeve, and a Millere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Sompnour, and a Pardoner also,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A Manciple, and myself, there were no mo’.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>The <b>Miller</b> was a stout carle for the nones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full big he was of brawn, and eke of bones;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That proved well, for ov’r all where<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-187" id="noteref-187" epub:type="noteref">187</a> he came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At wrestling he would bear away the ram.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-188" id="noteref-188" epub:type="noteref">188</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was short-shouldered, broad, a thickë gnarr,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-189" id="noteref-189" epub:type="noteref">189</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was no door, that he n’old heave off bar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or break it at a running with his head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His beard as any sow or fox was red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thereto broad, as though it were a spade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the cop<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-190" id="noteref-190" epub:type="noteref">190</a> right of his nose he had</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wart, and thereon stood a tuft of hairs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Red as the bristles of a sowë’s ears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His nosë-thirlës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-191" id="noteref-191" epub:type="noteref">191</a> blackë were and wide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sword and buckler bare he by his side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His mouth as widë was as a furnáce.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was a jangler, and a goliardais,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-192" id="noteref-192" epub:type="noteref">192</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that was most of sin and harlotries.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well could he stealë corn, and tollë thrice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet he had a thumb of gold, pardie.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-193" id="noteref-193" epub:type="noteref">193</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>A white coat and a blue hood weared he.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A baggëpipe well could he blow and soun’,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therewithal he brought us out of town.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>A gentle <b>Manciple</b><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-194" id="noteref-194" epub:type="noteref">194</a> was there of a temple,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of which achatours<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-195" id="noteref-195" epub:type="noteref">195</a> mightë take ensample</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For to be wise in buying of vitaille.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For whether that he paid, or took by taile,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-196" id="noteref-196" epub:type="noteref">196</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Algate<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-197" id="noteref-197" epub:type="noteref">197</a> he waited so in his achate,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-198" id="noteref-198" epub:type="noteref">198</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he was aye before in good estate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now is not that of God a full fair grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That such a lewëd mannë’s wit shall pace<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-199" id="noteref-199" epub:type="noteref">199</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wisdom of an heap of learned men?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of masters had he more than thriës ten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That were of law expert and curious:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of which there was a dozen in that house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worthy to be stewárds of rent and land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of any lord that is in Engleland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To makë him live by his proper good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In honour debtless, but if he were wood,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-200" id="noteref-200" epub:type="noteref">200</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or live as scarcely as him list desire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And able for to helpen all a shire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In any case that mightë fall or hap;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet this Manciple set their allër cap.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-201" id="noteref-201" epub:type="noteref">201</a></span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>The <b>Reevë</b><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-202" id="noteref-202" epub:type="noteref">202</a> was a slender choleric man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His beard was shav’d as nigh as ever he can.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hair was by his earës round y-shorn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His top was docked like a priest beforn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full longë were his leggës, and full lean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Y-like a staff, there was no calf y-seen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well could he keep a garner and a bin:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-203" id="noteref-203" epub:type="noteref">203</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was no auditor<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-204" id="noteref-204" epub:type="noteref">204</a> could on him win.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well wist he by the drought, and by the rain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The yielding of his seed and of his grain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His lordë’s sheep, his neat,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-205" id="noteref-205" epub:type="noteref">205</a> and his dairy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His swine, his horse, his store, and his poultrý,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were wholly in this Reevë’s governing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by his cov’nant gave he reckoning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since that his lord was twenty year of age;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There could no man bring him in arrearáge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was no bailiff, herd, nor other hine,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-206" id="noteref-206" epub:type="noteref">206</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he ne knew his sleight and his covine:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-207" id="noteref-207" epub:type="noteref">207</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>They were adrad<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-208" id="noteref-208" epub:type="noteref">208</a> of him, as of the death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His wonning<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-209" id="noteref-209" epub:type="noteref">209</a> was full fair upon an heath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With greenë trees y-shadow’d was his place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He couldë better than his lord purchase.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full rich he was y-stored privily.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His lord well could he pleasë subtilly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To give and lend him of his owen good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And have a thank, and yet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-210" id="noteref-210" epub:type="noteref">210</a> a coat and hood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In youth he learned had a good mistére.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-211" id="noteref-211" epub:type="noteref">211</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was a well good wright, a carpentére</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Reevë sate upon a right good stot,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-212" id="noteref-212" epub:type="noteref">212</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That was all pomely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-213" id="noteref-213" epub:type="noteref">213</a> gray, and hightë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-214" id="noteref-214" epub:type="noteref">214</a> Scot.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A long surcoat of perse<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-215" id="noteref-215" epub:type="noteref">215</a> upon he had,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by his side he bare a rusty blade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Norfolk was this Reeve, of which I tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beside a town men clepen Baldeswell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tucked he was, as is a friar, about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever rode the hinderest of the rout.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-216" id="noteref-216" epub:type="noteref">216</a></span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>A <b>Sompnour</b><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-217" id="noteref-217" epub:type="noteref">217</a> was there with us in that place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That had a fire-red cherubinnës face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For sausëfleme<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-218" id="noteref-218" epub:type="noteref">218</a> he was, with eyen narrow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As hot he was and lecherous as a sparrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With scalled browës black, and pilled<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-219" id="noteref-219" epub:type="noteref">219</a> beard:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his viságe children were sore afeard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There n’as quicksilver, litharge, nor brimstone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boras, ceruse, nor oil of tartar none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor ointëment that wouldë cleanse or bite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That him might helpen of his whelkës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-220" id="noteref-220" epub:type="noteref">220</a> white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor of the knobbës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-221" id="noteref-221" epub:type="noteref">221</a> sitting on his cheeks.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well lov’d he garlic, onións, and leeks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for to drink strong wine as red as blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then would he speak, and cry as he were wood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when that he well drunken had the wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then would he speakë no word but Latin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fewë termës knew he, two or three,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he had learned out of some decree;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No wonder is, he heard it all the day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eke ye knowen well, how that a jay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can clepen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-222" id="noteref-222" epub:type="noteref">222</a> “Wat,” as well as can the Pope.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But whoso would in other thing him grope,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-223" id="noteref-223" epub:type="noteref">223</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then had he spent all his philosophy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aye, <i xml:lang="la">Questio quid juris</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-224" id="noteref-224" epub:type="noteref">224</a> would he cry.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He was a gentle harlot<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-225" id="noteref-225" epub:type="noteref">225</a> and a kind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A better fellów should a man not find.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wouldë suffer, for a quart of wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A good fellow to have his concubine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A twelvemonth, and excuse him at the full.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full privily a finch eke could he pull.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-226" id="noteref-226" epub:type="noteref">226</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if he found owhere<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-227" id="noteref-227" epub:type="noteref">227</a> a good felláw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wouldë teachë him to have none awe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In such a case of the archdeacon’s curse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-228" id="noteref-228" epub:type="noteref">228</a> a mannë’s soul were in his purse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in his purse he should y-punished be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Purse is the archëdeacon’s hell,” said he.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But well I wot, he lied right indeed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of cursing ought each guilty man to dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For curse will slay right as assoiling<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-229" id="noteref-229" epub:type="noteref">229</a> saveth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And also ’ware him of a significavit.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-230" id="noteref-230" epub:type="noteref">230</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In danger had he at his owen guise<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-231" id="noteref-231" epub:type="noteref">231</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The youngë girlës of the diocese,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And knew their counsel, and was of their rede.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-232" id="noteref-232" epub:type="noteref">232</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>A garland had he set upon his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As great as it were for an alëstake:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-233" id="noteref-233" epub:type="noteref">233</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>A buckler had he made him of a cake.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>With him there rode a gentle <b>Pardonere</b><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-234" id="noteref-234" epub:type="noteref">234</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Ronceval, his friend and his compere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That straight was comen from the court of Romë.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full loud he sang, “Come hither, lovë, tó me.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Sompnour bare to him a stiff burdoun,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-235" id="noteref-235" epub:type="noteref">235</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was never trump of half so great a soun’.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Pardoner had hair as yellow as wax,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But smooth it hung, as doth a strike<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-236" id="noteref-236" epub:type="noteref">236</a> of flax:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By ounces hung his lockës that he had,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therewith he his shoulders oversprad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full thin it lay, by culpons<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-237" id="noteref-237" epub:type="noteref">237</a> one and one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But hood for jollity, he weared none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For it was trussed up in his wallét.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him thought he rode all of the newë get,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-238" id="noteref-238" epub:type="noteref">238</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dishevel, save his cap, he rode all bare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such glaring eyen had he, as an hare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A vernicle<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-239" id="noteref-239" epub:type="noteref">239</a> had he sew’d upon his cap.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His wallët lay before him in his lap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bretful<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-240" id="noteref-240" epub:type="noteref">240</a> of pardon come from Rome all hot.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A voice he had as small as hath a goat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No beard had he, nor ever one should have.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As smooth it was as it were new y-shave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I trow he were a gelding or a mare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But of his craft, from Berwick unto Ware,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ne was there such another pardonere.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in his mail<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-241" id="noteref-241" epub:type="noteref">241</a> he had a pillowbere,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-242" id="noteref-242" epub:type="noteref">242</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, as he saidë, was our Lady’s veil:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said, he had a gobbet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-243" id="noteref-243" epub:type="noteref">243</a> of the sail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Saintë Peter had, when that he went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the sea, till Jesus Christ him hent.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-244" id="noteref-244" epub:type="noteref">244</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had a cross of latoun<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-245" id="noteref-245" epub:type="noteref">245</a> full of stones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in a glass he haddë piggë’s bones.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But with these relics, whennë that he fond</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A poorë parson dwelling upon lond,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a day he got him more money</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than that the parson got in moneths tway;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus with feigned flattering and japes,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-246" id="noteref-246" epub:type="noteref">246</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>He made the parson and the people his apes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But truëly to tellen at the last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was in church a noble ecclesiast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well could he read a lesson or a story,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But alderbest<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-247" id="noteref-247" epub:type="noteref">247</a> he sang an offertóry:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-248" id="noteref-248" epub:type="noteref">248</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For well he wistë, when that song was sung,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He mustë preach, and well afile his tongue,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-249" id="noteref-249" epub:type="noteref">249</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>To winnë silver, as he right well could:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore he sang full merrily and loud.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Now have I told you shortly in a clause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Th’ estate, th’ array, the number, and eke the cause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why that assembled was this company</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Southwark at this gentle hostelry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hightë the Tabard, fast by the Bell.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-250" id="noteref-250" epub:type="noteref">250</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now is timë to you for to tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How that we baren us that ilkë night,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-251" id="noteref-251" epub:type="noteref">251</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>When we were in that hostelry alight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after will I tell of our voyáge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the remnant of our pilgrimage.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But first I pray you of your courtesy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ye arette it not my villainy,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-252" id="noteref-252" epub:type="noteref">252</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though that I plainly speak in this mattére.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tellen you their wordës and their cheer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not though I speak their wordës properly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this ye knowen all so well as I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whoso shall tell a tale after a man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He must rehearse, as nigh as ever he can,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Every word, if it be in his charge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All speak he<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-253" id="noteref-253" epub:type="noteref">253</a> ne’er so rudely and so large;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or ellës he must tell his tale untrue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or feignë things, or findë wordës new.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He may not spare, although he were his brother;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He must as well say one word as another.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Christ spake Himself full broad in Holy Writ,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And well ye wot no villainy is it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eke Plato saith, whoso that can him read,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wordës must be cousin to the deed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Also I pray you to forgive it me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All have I<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-254" id="noteref-254" epub:type="noteref">254</a> not set folk in their degree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here in this tale, as that they shoulden stand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My wit is short, ye may well understand.</span>
			</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>
				<span>Great cheerë made our Host us every one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the supper set he us anon:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And served us with victual of the best.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strong was the wine, and well to drink us lest.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-255" id="noteref-255" epub:type="noteref">255</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>A seemly man Our Hostë was withal</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For to have been a marshal in an hall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A largë man he was with eyen steep,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-256" id="noteref-256" epub:type="noteref">256</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fairer burgess is there none in Cheap:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-257" id="noteref-257" epub:type="noteref">257</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bold of his speech, and wise and well y-taught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of manhoodë lacked him right naught.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eke thereto was he right a merry man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after supper playen he began,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spake of mirth amongës other things,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When that we haddë made our reckonings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saidë thus; “Now, lordingës, truly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye be to me welcome right heartily:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For by my troth, if that I shall not lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw not this year such a company</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once in this herberow,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-258" id="noteref-258" epub:type="noteref">258</a> as is now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fain would I do you mirth, an<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-259" id="noteref-259" epub:type="noteref">259</a> I wist how.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of a mirth I am right now bethought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To do you ease,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-260" id="noteref-260" epub:type="noteref">260</a> and it shall costë nought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye go to Canterbury; God you speed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blissful Martyr quitë you your meed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And well I wot, as ye go by the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye shapen you<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-261" id="noteref-261" epub:type="noteref">261</a> to talken and to play:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For truëly comfórt nor mirth is none</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ridë by the way as dumb as stone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therefore would I makë you disport,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I said erst, and do you some comfórt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if you liketh all<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-262" id="noteref-262" epub:type="noteref">262</a> by one assent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now for to standen at my judgëment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for to worken as I shall you say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To-morrow, when ye riden on the way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now by my father’s soulë that is dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But ye be merry, smiteth off<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-263" id="noteref-263" epub:type="noteref">263</a> mine head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hold up your hands withoutë morë speech.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Our counsel was not longë for to seech:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-264" id="noteref-264" epub:type="noteref">264</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Us thought it was not worth to make it wise,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-265" id="noteref-265" epub:type="noteref">265</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And granted him withoutë more avise,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-266" id="noteref-266" epub:type="noteref">266</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bade him say his verdict, as him lest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Lordings (quoth he), now hearken for the best;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But take it not, I pray you, in disdain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is the point, to speak it plat<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-267" id="noteref-267" epub:type="noteref">267</a> and plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That each of you, to shorten with your way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this voyáge, shall tellen talës tway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Canterbury-ward, I mean it so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And homeward he shall tellen other two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of aventúres that whilom have befall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And which of you that bear’th him best of all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That is to say, that telleth in this case</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Talës of best senténce and most solace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall have a supper at your allër cost<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-268" id="noteref-268" epub:type="noteref">268</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here in this placë, sitting by this post,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When that ye come again from Canterbury.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for to makë you the morë merry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will myselfë gladly with you ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right at mine owen cost, and be your guide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whoso will my judgëment withsay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall pay for all we spenden by the way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if ye vouchësafe that it be so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me anon withoutë wordës mo’,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-269" id="noteref-269" epub:type="noteref">269</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I will early shapë me therefore.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This thing was granted, and our oath we swore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With full glad heart, and prayed him also,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he would vouchësafe for to do so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that he wouldë be our governour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of our talës judge and reportour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And set a supper at a certain price;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we will ruled be at his device,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In high and low: and thus by one assent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We be accorded to his judgëment.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thereupon the wine was fet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-270" id="noteref-270" epub:type="noteref">270</a> anon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We drunken, and to restë went each one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withouten any longer tarrying</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A-morrow, when the day began to spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up rose our host, and was our allër cock,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-271" id="noteref-271" epub:type="noteref">271</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gather’d us together in a flock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And forth we ridden all a little space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the watering of Saint Thomas:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-272" id="noteref-272" epub:type="noteref">272</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there our host began his horse arrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saidë; “Lordës, hearken if you lest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye weet your forword,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-273" id="noteref-273" epub:type="noteref">273</a> and I it record.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If even-song and morning-song accord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let see now who shall tellë the first tale.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As ever may I drinkë wine or ale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whoso is rebel to my judgëment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall pay for all that by the way is spent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now draw ye cuts, ere that ye farther twin.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-274" id="noteref-274" epub:type="noteref">274</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>He which that hath the shortest shall begin.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Sir Knight (quoth he), my master and my lord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now draw the cut, for that is mine accord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come near (quoth he), my Lady Prioress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ye, Sir Clerk, let be your shamefastness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor study not: lay hand to, every man.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Anon to drawen every wight began,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shortly for to tellen as it was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were it by áventure, or sort, or cas,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-275" id="noteref-275" epub:type="noteref">275</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sooth is this, the cut fell to the Knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of which full blithe and glad was every wight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tell he must his tale as was reasón,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By forword, and by composition,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As ye have heard; what needeth wordës mo’?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when this good man saw that it was so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he that wise was and obediént</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To keep his forword by his free assent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said; “Sithen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-276" id="noteref-276" epub:type="noteref">276</a> I shall begin this game,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why, welcome be the cut in Goddë’s name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now let us ride, and hearken what I say.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And with that word we ridden forth our way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he began with right a merry cheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His tale anon, and said as ye shall hear.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
