<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Sompnour’s Tale</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-sompnours-tale" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Sompnour’s Tale</h2>
			<section id="the-sompnours-tale-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Prologue</h3>
				<p>
					<span>The Sompnour in his stirrups high he stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon this Friar his heartë was so wood,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2252" id="noteref-2252" epub:type="noteref">2252</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That like an aspen leaf he quoke<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2253" id="noteref-2253" epub:type="noteref">2253</a> for ire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Lordings,” quoth he, “but one thing I desire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I you beseech, that of your courtesy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since ye have heard this falsë Friar lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As suffer me I may my talë tell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Friar boasteth that he knoweth hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, God it wot, that is but little wonder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Friars and fiends be but little asunder.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, pardie, ye have often time heard tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How that a friar ravish’d was to hell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In spirit onës by a visioún,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as an angel led him up and down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shew him all the painës that there were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all the place saw he not a frere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of other folk he saw enough in woe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the angel spake the friar tho;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2254" id="noteref-2254" epub:type="noteref">2254</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Now, Sir,’ quoth he, ‘have friars such a grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That none of them shall come into this place?’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Yes’ quoth the angel; ‘many a millioún:’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And unto Satanas he led him down.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘And now hath Satanas,’ said he, ‘a tail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Broader than of a carrack<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2255" id="noteref-2255" epub:type="noteref">2255</a> is the sail.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hold up thy tail, thou Satanas,’ quoth he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Shew forth thine erse, and let the friar see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where is the nest of friars in this place.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And less than half a furlong way of space,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2256" id="noteref-2256" epub:type="noteref">2256</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right so as bees swarmen out of a hive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of the devil’s erse there gan to drive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A twenty thousand friars on a rout.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2257" id="noteref-2257" epub:type="noteref">2257</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And throughout hell they swarmed all about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And came again, as fast as they may gon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his erse they creeped every one:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He clapt his tail again, and lay full still.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This friar, when he looked had his fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the torments of that sorry place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His spirit God restored of his grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into his body again, and he awoke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But natheless for fearë yet he quoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So was the devil’s erse aye in his mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is his heritage, of very kind.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2258" id="noteref-2258" epub:type="noteref">2258</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>God save you allë, save this cursed Frere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My prologue will I end in this mannére.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-sompnours-tale-body" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Tale</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Lordings, there is in Yorkshire, as I guess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A marshy country callëd Holderness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which there went a limitour about</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To preach, and eke to beg, it is no doubt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so befell that on a day this frere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had preached at a church in his mannére,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And speciálly, above every thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Excited he the people in his preaching</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To trentals,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2259" id="noteref-2259" epub:type="noteref">2259</a> and to give, for Goddë’s sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherewith men mightë holy houses make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There as divinë service is honoúr’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not there as it is wasted and devoúr’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor where it needeth not for to be given,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As to possessioners,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2260" id="noteref-2260" epub:type="noteref">2260</a> that may liven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thanked be God, in wealth and abundánce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Trentals,” said he, “deliver from penánce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their friendës’ soulës, as well old as young,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea, when that they be hastily y-sung⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not for to hold a priest jolly and gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He singeth not but one mass in a day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deliver out,” quoth he, “anon the souls.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full hard it is, with flesh-hook or with owls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be y-clawed, or to burn or bake:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2261" id="noteref-2261" epub:type="noteref">2261</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now speed you hastily, for Christë’s sake.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when this friar had said all his intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With <i xml:lang="la">qui cum patre</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2262" id="noteref-2262" epub:type="noteref">2262</a> forth his way he went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When folk in church had giv’n him what them lest;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2263" id="noteref-2263" epub:type="noteref">2263</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He went his way, no longer would he rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With scrip and tipped staff, y-tucked high:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2264" id="noteref-2264" epub:type="noteref">2264</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>In every house he gan to pore<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2265" id="noteref-2265" epub:type="noteref">2265</a> and pry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And begged meal and cheese, or ellës corn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His fellow had a staff tipped with horn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pair of tables<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2266" id="noteref-2266" epub:type="noteref">2266</a> all of ivory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a pointel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2267" id="noteref-2267" epub:type="noteref">2267</a> y-polish’d fetisly,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2268" id="noteref-2268" epub:type="noteref">2268</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wrote alway the namës, as he stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the folk that gave them any good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Askauncë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2269" id="noteref-2269" epub:type="noteref">2269</a> that he wouldë for them pray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Give us a bushel wheat, or malt, or rey,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2270" id="noteref-2270" epub:type="noteref">2270</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Goddë’s kichel,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2271" id="noteref-2271" epub:type="noteref">2271</a> or a trip<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2272" id="noteref-2272" epub:type="noteref">2272</a> of cheese,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ellës what you list, we may not chese;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2273" id="noteref-2273" epub:type="noteref">2273</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Goddë’s halfpenny, or a mass penny;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or give us of your brawn, if ye have any;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dagon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2274" id="noteref-2274" epub:type="noteref">2274</a> of your blanket, levë dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our sister dear⁠—lo, here I write your name⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bacon or beef, or such thing as ye find.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sturdy harlot<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2275" id="noteref-2275" epub:type="noteref">2275</a> went them aye behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was their hostë’s man, and bare a sack,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what men gave them, laid it on his back.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when that he was out at door, anon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He planed away the namës every one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he before had written in his tables:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He served them with nifles<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2276" id="noteref-2276" epub:type="noteref">2276</a> and with fables.⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Nay, there thou liest, thou Sompnour,” quoth the Frere.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Peace,” quoth our Host, “for Christë’s mother dear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell forth thy tale, and spare it not at all.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“So thrive I,” quoth this Sompnour, “so I shall.”⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So long he went from house to house, till he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came to a house, where he was wont to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Refreshed more than in a hundred places.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sick lay the husband man, whose that the place is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bedrid upon a couchë low he lay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“<i xml:lang="la">Deus hic</i>,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2277" id="noteref-2277" epub:type="noteref">2277</a> quoth he; “O Thomas friend, good day,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said this friár, all courteously and soft.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thomas,” quoth he, “God yield it you,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2278" id="noteref-2278" epub:type="noteref">2278</a> full oft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have I upon this bench fared full well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here have I eaten many a merry meal.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the bench he drove away the cat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And laid adown his potent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2279" id="noteref-2279" epub:type="noteref">2279</a> and his hat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke his scrip, and sat himself adown:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His fellow was y-walked into town</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forth with his knave,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2280" id="noteref-2280" epub:type="noteref">2280</a> into that hostelry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where as he shopë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2281" id="noteref-2281" epub:type="noteref">2281</a> him that night to lie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O dearë master,” quoth this sickë man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“How have ye fared since that March began?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw you not this fortënight and more.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“God wot,” quoth he, “laboúr’d have I full sore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And specially for thy salvatión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have I said many a precious orison,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for mine other friendës, God them bless.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have this day been at your church at mess,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2282" id="noteref-2282" epub:type="noteref">2282</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said sermón after my simple wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not all after the text of Holy Writ;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For it is hard to you, as I suppose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore will I teach you aye the glose.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2283" id="noteref-2283" epub:type="noteref">2283</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glosing is a full glorious thing certáin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For letter slayeth, as we clerkës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2284" id="noteref-2284" epub:type="noteref">2284</a> sayn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There have I taught them to be charitable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And spend their good where it is reasonable.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there I saw our damë; where is she?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Yonder I trow that in the yard she be,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saidë this man; “and she will come anon.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Hey master, welcome be ye by Saint John,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saidë this wife; “how fare ye heartily?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This friar riseth up full courteously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her embraceth in his armës narrow,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2285" id="noteref-2285" epub:type="noteref">2285</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And kiss’th her sweet, and chirketh as a sparrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his lippës: “Damë,” quoth he, “right well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he that is your servant every deal.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2286" id="noteref-2286" epub:type="noteref">2286</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thanked be God, that gave you soul and life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet saw I not this day so fair a wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all the churchë, God so savë me,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Yea, God amend defaultës, Sir,” quoth she;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Algatës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2287" id="noteref-2287" epub:type="noteref">2287</a> welcome be ye, by my fay.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“<i xml:lang="fr">Grand mercy</i>, Dame; that have I found alway.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But of your greatë goodness, by your leave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wouldë pray you that ye not you grieve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will with Thomas speak a little throw:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2288" id="noteref-2288" epub:type="noteref">2288</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>These curates be so negligent and slow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To gropë tenderly a conscience.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In shrift<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2289" id="noteref-2289" epub:type="noteref">2289</a> and preaching is my diligence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And study in Peter’s wordës and in Paul’s;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I walk and fishë Christian mennë’s souls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To yield our Lord Jesus his proper rent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To spread his word is allë mine intent.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now by your faith, O dearë Sir,” quoth she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Chide him right well, for saintë charity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is aye angry as is a pismire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though that he have all that he can desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though I him wrie<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2290" id="noteref-2290" epub:type="noteref">2290</a> at night, and make him warm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ov’r him lay my leg and eke mine arm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He groaneth as our boar that lies in sty:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Other disport of him right none have I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I may not please him in no manner case.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2291" id="noteref-2291" epub:type="noteref">2291</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O Thomas, <i xml:lang="fr">je vous dis</i>, Thomas, Thomas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This maketh the fiend,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2292" id="noteref-2292" epub:type="noteref">2292</a> this must be amended.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ire is a thing that high God hath defended,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2293" id="noteref-2293" epub:type="noteref">2293</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thereof will I speak a word or two.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now, master,” quoth the wife, “ere that I go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What will ye dine? I will go thereabout.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now, Damë,” quoth he, “<i xml:lang="fr">je vous dis sans doute</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had I not of a capon but the liver,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of your whitë bread not but a shiver,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2294" id="noteref-2294" epub:type="noteref">2294</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after that a roasted piggë’s head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(But I would that for me no beast were dead,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then had I with you homely suffisánce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am a man of little sustenánce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My spirit hath its fost’ring in the Bible.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My body is aye so ready and penible<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2295" id="noteref-2295" epub:type="noteref">2295</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wakë,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2296" id="noteref-2296" epub:type="noteref">2296</a> that my stomach is destroy’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray you, Dame, that ye be not annoy’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though I so friendly you my counsel shew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By God, I would have told it but to few.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Now, Sir,” quoth she, “but one word ere I go;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My child is dead within these weekës two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon after that ye went out of this town.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“His death saw I by revelatioún,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said this friar, “at home in our dortour.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2297" id="noteref-2297" epub:type="noteref">2297</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I dare well say, that less than half an hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After his death, I saw him borne to bliss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In minë vision, so God me wiss.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2298" id="noteref-2298" epub:type="noteref">2298</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>So did our sexton, and our fermerere,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2299" id="noteref-2299" epub:type="noteref">2299</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That have been truë friars fifty year⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They may now, God be thanked of his love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Makë their jubilee, and walk above.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2300" id="noteref-2300" epub:type="noteref">2300</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And up I rose, and all our convent eke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With many a tearë trilling on my cheek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Withoutë noise or clattering of bells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Te Deum” was our song, and nothing else,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save that to Christ I bade an orison,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thanking him of my revelatión.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, Sir and Damë, trustë me right well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our orisons be more effectuel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And more we see of Christë’s secret things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than borel folk,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2301" id="noteref-2301" epub:type="noteref">2301</a> although that they be kings.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We live in povert’, and in abstinence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And borel folk in riches and dispence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of meat and drink, and in their foul delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We have this worldë’s lust<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2302" id="noteref-2302" epub:type="noteref">2302</a> all in despight<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2303" id="noteref-2303" epub:type="noteref">2303</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lazar and Dives lived diversely,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And diverse guerdon haddë they thereby.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whoso will pray, he must fast and be clean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fat his soul, and keep his body lean.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We fare as saith th’ apostle; cloth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2304" id="noteref-2304" epub:type="noteref">2304</a> and food</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suffice us, although they be not full good.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cleanness and the fasting of us freres</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Maketh that Christ accepteth our prayéres.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, Moses forty days and forty night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fasted, ere that the high God full of might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spake with him in the mountain of Sinái:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With empty womb of fasting many a day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Received he the lawë, that was writ</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Goddë’s finger; and Eli,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2305" id="noteref-2305" epub:type="noteref">2305</a> well ye wit,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2306" id="noteref-2306" epub:type="noteref">2306</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Mount Horeb, ere he had any speech</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With highë God, that is our livës’ leech,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2307" id="noteref-2307" epub:type="noteref">2307</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He fasted long, and was in contemplánce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aaron, that had the temple in governánce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke the other priestës every one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the temple when they shouldë gon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To prayë for the people, and do service,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They wouldë drinken in no manner wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No drinkë, which that might them drunken make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there in abstinencë pray and wake,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2308" id="noteref-2308" epub:type="noteref">2308</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest that they diëd: take heed what I say⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2309" id="noteref-2309" epub:type="noteref">2309</a> they be sober that for the people pray⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ware that, I say⁠—no more: for it sufficeth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our Lord Jesus, as Holy Writ deviseth,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2310" id="noteref-2310" epub:type="noteref">2310</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave us example of fasting and prayéres:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore we mendicants, we sely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2311" id="noteref-2311" epub:type="noteref">2311</a> freres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be wedded to povert’ and continence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To charity, humbless, and abstinence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To persecutión for righteousness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To weeping, misericorde,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2312" id="noteref-2312" epub:type="noteref">2312</a> and to cleannéss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore may ye see that our prayéres</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(I speak of us, we mendicants, we freres),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be to the highë God more acceptable</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than yourës, with your feastës at your table.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Paradise first, if I shall not lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was man out chased for his gluttony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And chaste was man in Paradise certáin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But hark now, Thomas, what I shall thee sayn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have no text of it, as I suppose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I shall find it in a manner glose;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2313" id="noteref-2313" epub:type="noteref">2313</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That speciálly our sweet Lord Jesus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spake this of friars, when he saidë thus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Blessed be they that poor in spirit be.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so forth all the gospel may ye see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether it be liker our professión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or theirs that swimmen in possessión;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fy on their pomp, and on their gluttony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on their lewëdness! I them defy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me thinketh they be like Jovinian,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2314" id="noteref-2314" epub:type="noteref">2314</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fat as a whale, and walking as a swan;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All vinolent as bottle in the spence;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2315" id="noteref-2315" epub:type="noteref">2315</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their prayer is of full great reverence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they for soulës say the Psalm of David,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, ‘Buf’ they say, <i xml:lang="la">Cor meum eructavit</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2316" id="noteref-2316" epub:type="noteref">2316</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who follow Christë’s gospel and his lore<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2317" id="noteref-2317" epub:type="noteref">2317</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But we, that humble be, and chaste, and pore,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2318" id="noteref-2318" epub:type="noteref">2318</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Workers of Goddë’s word, not auditoúrs?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2319" id="noteref-2319" epub:type="noteref">2319</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore right as a hawk upon a sours<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2320" id="noteref-2320" epub:type="noteref">2320</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up springs into the air, right so prayéres</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of charitable and chaste busy freres</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Makë their sours to Goddë’s earës two.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thomas, Thomas, so may I ride or go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by that lord that callëd is Saint Ive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>N’ere thou our brother, shouldest thou not thrive;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2321" id="noteref-2321" epub:type="noteref">2321</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>In our chapíter pray we day and night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Christ, that he thee sendë health and might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy body for to wieldë hastily.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2322" id="noteref-2322" epub:type="noteref">2322</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“God wot,” quoth he, “nothing thereof feel I;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So help me Christ, as I in fewë years</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have spended upon divers manner freres<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2323" id="noteref-2323" epub:type="noteref">2323</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full many a pound, yet fare I ne’er the bet;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2324" id="noteref-2324" epub:type="noteref">2324</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Certain my good have I almost beset:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2325" id="noteref-2325" epub:type="noteref">2325</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Farewell my gold, for it is all ago.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2326" id="noteref-2326" epub:type="noteref">2326</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The friar answér’d, “O Thomas, dost thou so?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What needest thou diversë friars to seech?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2327" id="noteref-2327" epub:type="noteref">2327</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>What needeth him that hath a perfect leech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To seeken other leeches in the town?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your inconstánce is your confusioún.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hold ye then me, or ellës our convént,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To prayë for you insufficiént?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thomas, that jape<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2328" id="noteref-2328" epub:type="noteref">2328</a> it is not worth a mite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your malady is for we have too lite.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2329" id="noteref-2329" epub:type="noteref">2329</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, give that convent half a quarter oats;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And give that convent four and twenty groats;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And give that friar a penny, and let him go!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nay, nay, Thomas, it may no thing be so.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What is a farthing worth parted on twelve?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, each thing that is oned<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2330" id="noteref-2330" epub:type="noteref">2330</a> in himselve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is morë strong than when it is y-scatter’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thomas, of me thou shalt not be y-flatter’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wouldest have our labour all for nought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The highë God, that all this world hath wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saith, that the workman worthy is his hire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thomas, nought of your treasure I desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As for myself, but that all our convént</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pray for you is aye so diligent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for to buildë Christë’s owen church.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thomas, if ye will learnë for to wirch,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2331" id="noteref-2331" epub:type="noteref">2331</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of building up of churches may ye find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If it be good, in Thomas’ life of Ind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye lie here full of anger and of ire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which the devil sets your heart on fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And chidë here this holy innocent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your wife, that is so meek and patiént.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore trow<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2332" id="noteref-2332" epub:type="noteref">2332</a> me, Thomas, if thee lest,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2333" id="noteref-2333" epub:type="noteref">2333</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne strive not with thy wife, as for the best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bear this word away now, by thy faith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Touching such thing, lo, what the wise man saith:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Within thy housë be thou no lión;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thy subjécts do none oppressión;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor make thou thine acquaintance for to flee.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet, Thomas, eftsoonës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2334" id="noteref-2334" epub:type="noteref">2334</a> charge I thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beware from ire that in thy bosom sleeps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ware from the serpent, that so slily creeps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the grass, and stingeth subtilly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beware, my son, and hearken patiently,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That twenty thousand men have lost their lives</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For striving with their lemans<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2335" id="noteref-2335" epub:type="noteref">2335</a> and their wives.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now since ye have so holy and meek a wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What needeth you, Thomas, to makë strife?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is, y-wis,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2336" id="noteref-2336" epub:type="noteref">2336</a> no serpent so cruél,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When men tread on his tail nor half so fell,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2337" id="noteref-2337" epub:type="noteref">2337</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As woman is, when she hath caught an ire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Very<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2338" id="noteref-2338" epub:type="noteref">2338</a> vengeánce is then all her desire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ire is a sin, one of the greatë seven,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2339" id="noteref-2339" epub:type="noteref">2339</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abominable to the God of heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to himself it is destructión.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This every lewëd<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2340" id="noteref-2340" epub:type="noteref">2340</a> vicar and parsón</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can say, how ire engenders homicide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ire is in sooth th’ executor<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2341" id="noteref-2341" epub:type="noteref">2341</a> of pride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I could of ire you say so muchë sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My tale shouldë last until to-morrow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore pray I God both day and night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An irous<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2342" id="noteref-2342" epub:type="noteref">2342</a> man God send him little might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is great harm, and certes great pitý</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To set an irous man in high degree.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Whilom<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2343" id="noteref-2343" epub:type="noteref">2343</a> there was an irous potestatë,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2344" id="noteref-2344" epub:type="noteref">2344</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As saith Senec, that during his estate<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2345" id="noteref-2345" epub:type="noteref">2345</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a day out rodë knightës two;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as fortunë would that it were so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The one of them came home, the other not.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon the knight before the judge is brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That saidë thus; ‘Thou hast thy fellow slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which I doom thee to the death certáin.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to another knight commanded he;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Go, lead him to the death, I chargë thee.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And happened, as they went by the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toward the placë where as he should dey,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2346" id="noteref-2346" epub:type="noteref">2346</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The knight came, which men weened<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2347" id="noteref-2347" epub:type="noteref">2347</a> had been dead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then thoughtë they it was the bestë rede<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2348" id="noteref-2348" epub:type="noteref">2348</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lead them both unto the judge again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They saidë, ‘Lord, the knight hath not y-slain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His fellow; here he standeth whole alive.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Ye shall be dead,’ quoth he, ‘so may I thrive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is to say, both one, and two, and three.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the firstë knight right thus spake he:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘I damned thee, thou must algate<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2349" id="noteref-2349" epub:type="noteref">2349</a> be dead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou also must needës lose thine head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thou the cause art why thy fellow dieth.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the thirdë knight right thus he sayeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Thou hast not done that I commanded thee.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus he did do slay them<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2350" id="noteref-2350" epub:type="noteref">2350</a> allë three.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Irous Cambyses was eke dronkelew,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2351" id="noteref-2351" epub:type="noteref">2351</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And aye delighted him to be a shrew.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2352" id="noteref-2352" epub:type="noteref">2352</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so befell, a lord of his meinie,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2353" id="noteref-2353" epub:type="noteref">2353</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That loved virtuous moralitý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said on a day betwixt them two right thus:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘A lord is lost, if he be vicious.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>[An irous man is like a frantic beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which there is of wisdom none arrest;]<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2354" id="noteref-2354" epub:type="noteref">2354</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drunkenness is eke a foul record</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of any man, and namely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2355" id="noteref-2355" epub:type="noteref">2355</a> of a lord.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is full many an eye and many an ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awaiting on<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2356" id="noteref-2356" epub:type="noteref">2356</a> a lord, he knows not where.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Goddë’s love, drink more attemperly:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2357" id="noteref-2357" epub:type="noteref">2357</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wine maketh man to losë wretchedly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His mind, and eke his limbës every one.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘The réverse shalt thou see,’ quoth he, ‘anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And prove it by thine own experience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That winë doth to folk no such offence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no wine bereaveth me my might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of hand, nor foot, nor of mine eyen sight.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for despite he drankë muchë more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hundred part<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2358" id="noteref-2358" epub:type="noteref">2358</a> than he had done before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And right anon this cursed irous wretch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This knightë’s sonë let<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2359" id="noteref-2359" epub:type="noteref">2359</a> before him fetch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Commanding him he should before him stand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And suddenly he took his bow in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And up the string he pulled to his ear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with an arrow slew the child right there.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Now whether have I a sicker<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2360" id="noteref-2360" epub:type="noteref">2360</a> hand or non?’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2361" id="noteref-2361" epub:type="noteref">2361</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quoth he; ‘Is all my might and mind agone?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath wine bereaved me mine eyen sight?’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should I tell the answer of the knight?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His son was slain, there is no more to say.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beware therefore with lordës how ye play,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2362" id="noteref-2362" epub:type="noteref">2362</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sing <i xml:lang="la">Placebo</i>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2363" id="noteref-2363" epub:type="noteref">2363</a> and I shall if I can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2364" id="noteref-2364" epub:type="noteref">2364</a> it be unto a poorë man:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To a poor man men should his vices tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But not t’ a lord, though he should go to hell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, irous Cyrus, thilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2365" id="noteref-2365" epub:type="noteref">2365</a> Persian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How he destroy’d the river of Gisen,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2366" id="noteref-2366" epub:type="noteref">2366</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that a horse of his was drowned therein,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that he wentë Babylon to win:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He madë that the river was so small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That women mightë wade it over all.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2367" id="noteref-2367" epub:type="noteref">2367</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, what said he, that so well teachë can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Be thou no fellow to an irous man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor with no wood<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2368" id="noteref-2368" epub:type="noteref">2368</a> man walkë by the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest thee repent;’ I will no farther say.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Now, Thomas, levë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2369" id="noteref-2369" epub:type="noteref">2369</a> brother, leave thine ire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt me find as just as is as squire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hold not the devil’s knife aye at thine heart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine anger doth thee all too sorë smart;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2370" id="noteref-2370" epub:type="noteref">2370</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But shew to me all thy confessión.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nay,” quoth the sickë man, “by Saint Simón</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have been shriven<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2371" id="noteref-2371" epub:type="noteref">2371</a> this day of my curáte;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have him told all wholly mine estate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Needeth no more to speak of it, saith he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if me list of mine humility.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Give me then of thy good to make our cloister,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quoth he, “for many a mussel and many an oyster,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When other men have been full well at ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath been our food, our cloister for to rese:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2372" id="noteref-2372" epub:type="noteref">2372</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet, God wot, unneth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2373" id="noteref-2373" epub:type="noteref">2373</a> the foundement<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2374" id="noteref-2374" epub:type="noteref">2374</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Performed is, nor of our pavëment</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is not a tilë yet within our wones:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2375" id="noteref-2375" epub:type="noteref">2375</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>By God, we owë forty pound for stones.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now help, Thomas, for him that harrow’d hell,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2376" id="noteref-2376" epub:type="noteref">2376</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ellës must we ourë bookës sell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if ye lack our predicatión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then goes this world all to destructión.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For whoso from this world would us bereave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So God me save, Thomas, by your leave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would bereave out of this world the sun.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For who can teach and worken as we conne?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2377" id="noteref-2377" epub:type="noteref">2377</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that is not of little time (quoth he),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But since Elijah was, and Elisée,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2378" id="noteref-2378" epub:type="noteref">2378</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have friars been, that find I of record,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In charity, y-thanked be our Lord.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, Thomas, help for saintë charity.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And down anon he set him on his knee.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The sick man waxed well nigh wood<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2379" id="noteref-2379" epub:type="noteref">2379</a> for ire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wouldë that the friar had been afire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his falsë dissimulatión.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Such thing as is in my possessión,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quoth he, “that may I give you and none other:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye say me thus, how that I am your brother.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Yea, certes,” quoth this friar, “yea, trustë well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I took our Dame the letter of our seal”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2380" id="noteref-2380" epub:type="noteref">2380</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now well,” quoth he, “and somewhat shall I give</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto your holy convent while I live;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in thine hand thou shalt it have anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On this conditión, and other none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou depart<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2381" id="noteref-2381" epub:type="noteref">2381</a> it so, my dearë brother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That every friar have as much as other:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This shalt thou swear on thy professión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Withoutë fraud or cavillatión.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2382" id="noteref-2382" epub:type="noteref">2382</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I swear it,” quoth the friar, “upon my faith.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therewithal his hand in his he lay’th;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Lo here my faith, in me shall be no lack.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Then put thine hand adown right by my back,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saidë this man, “and gropë well behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath my buttock, therë thou shalt find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thing, that I have hid in privity.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ah,” thought this friar, “that shall go with me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And down his hand he launched to the clift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In hopë for to findë there a gift.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when this sickë man feltë this frere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About his tailë groping there and here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid his hand he let the friar a fart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no capel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2383" id="noteref-2383" epub:type="noteref">2383</a> drawing in a cart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That might have let a fart of such a soun’.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The friar up start, as doth a wood<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2384" id="noteref-2384" epub:type="noteref">2384</a> lioún:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ah, falsë churl,” quoth he, “for Goddë’s bones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This hast thou in despite done for the nones:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2385" id="noteref-2385" epub:type="noteref">2385</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt abie<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2386" id="noteref-2386" epub:type="noteref">2386</a> this fart, if that I may.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His meinie,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2387" id="noteref-2387" epub:type="noteref">2387</a> which that heard of this affray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came leaping in, and chased out the frere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And forth he went with a full angry cheer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2388" id="noteref-2388" epub:type="noteref">2388</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fetch’d his fellow, there as lay his store:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He looked as it were a wildë boar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And groundë with his teeth, so was he wroth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sturdy pace down to the court he go’th,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where as there wonn’d<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2389" id="noteref-2389" epub:type="noteref">2389</a> a man of great honoúr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom that he was always confessoúr:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This worthy man was lord of that villáge.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This friar came, as he were in a rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where as this lord sat eating at his board:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unnethës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2390" id="noteref-2390" epub:type="noteref">2390</a> might the friar speak one word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till at the last he saidë, “God you see.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2391" id="noteref-2391" epub:type="noteref">2391</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This lord gan look, and said, “<i xml:lang="la">Ben’dicite!</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>What? Friar John, what manner world is this?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see well that there something is amiss;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye look as though the wood were full of thievës.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sit down anon, and tell me what your grieve<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2392" id="noteref-2392" epub:type="noteref">2392</a> is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And it shall be amended, if I may.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I have,” quoth he, “had a despite to-day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God yieldë you,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2393" id="noteref-2393" epub:type="noteref">2393</a> adown in your villáge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in this world is none so poor a page,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That would not have abominatioún</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that I have received in your town:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet ne grieveth me nothing so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As that the oldë churl, with lookës hoar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blasphemed hath our holy convent eke.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now, master,” quoth this lord, “I you beseek”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“No master, Sir,” quoth he, “but servitoúr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though I have had in schoolë that honoúr.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God liketh not, that men us Rabbi call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Neither in market, nor in your large hall.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“No force,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2394" id="noteref-2394" epub:type="noteref">2394</a> quoth he; “but tell me all your grief.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Sir,” quoth this friar, “an odious mischíef</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This day betid<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2395" id="noteref-2395" epub:type="noteref">2395</a> is to mine order and me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so <i xml:lang="la">par consequence</i> to each degree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of holy churchë, God amend it soon.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Sir,” quoth the lord, “ye know what is to doon:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2396" id="noteref-2396" epub:type="noteref">2396</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Distemp’r you not,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2397" id="noteref-2397" epub:type="noteref">2397</a> ye be my confessoúr.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye be the salt of th’ earth, and the savoúr;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Goddë’s love your patiénce now hold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell me your grief.” And he anon him told</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ye have heard before, ye know well what.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lady of the house aye stillë sat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till she had heardë what the friar said.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Hey, Goddë’s mother;” quoth she, “blissful maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is there ought ellës? tell me faithfully.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Madame,” quoth he, “how thinketh you thereby?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“How thinketh me?” quoth she; “so God me speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say, a churl hath done a churlish deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What should I say? God let him never thé;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2398" id="noteref-2398" epub:type="noteref">2398</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>His sickë head is full of vanity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hold him in a manner phrenesy.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2399" id="noteref-2399" epub:type="noteref">2399</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Madame,” quoth he, “by God, I shall not lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I in other wise may be awreke,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2400" id="noteref-2400" epub:type="noteref">2400</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall defame him ov’r all there<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2401" id="noteref-2401" epub:type="noteref">2401</a> I speak;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This falsë blasphemoúr, that charged me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To partë that will not departed be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To every man alikë, with mischance.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The lord sat still, as he were in a trance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his heart he rolled up and down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“How had this churl imaginatioún</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shewë such a problem to the frere.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never ere now heard I of such mattére;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I trow<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2402" id="noteref-2402" epub:type="noteref">2402</a> the Devil put it in his mind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all arsmetrik<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2403" id="noteref-2403" epub:type="noteref">2403</a> shall there no man find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before this day, of such a questión.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who shouldë make a demonstratión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That every man should have alike his part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As of the sound and savour of a fart?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O nice<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2404" id="noteref-2404" epub:type="noteref">2404</a> proudë churl, I shrew<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2405" id="noteref-2405" epub:type="noteref">2405</a> his face.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, Sirës,” quoth the lord, “with hardë grace,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2406" id="noteref-2406" epub:type="noteref">2406</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who ever heard of such a thing ere now?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To every man alikë? tell me how.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is impossible, it may not be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hey nicë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2407" id="noteref-2407" epub:type="noteref">2407</a> churl, God let him never thé.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2408" id="noteref-2408" epub:type="noteref">2408</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rumbling of a fart, and every soun’,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is but of air reverberatioún,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever wasteth lite and lite<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2409" id="noteref-2409" epub:type="noteref">2409</a> away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no man can deemen,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2410" id="noteref-2410" epub:type="noteref">2410</a> by my fay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that it were departed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2411" id="noteref-2411" epub:type="noteref">2411</a> equally.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What? lo, my churl, lo yet how shrewedly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2412" id="noteref-2412" epub:type="noteref">2412</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto my confessoúr to-day he spake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hold him certain a demoniac.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now eat your meat, and let the churl go play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let him go hang himself a devil way!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now stood the lordë’s squiër at the board,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That carv’d his meat, and heardë word by word</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all this thing, which that I have you said.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My lord,” quoth he, “be ye not evil paid,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2413" id="noteref-2413" epub:type="noteref">2413</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I couldë tellë, for a gownë-cloth,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2414" id="noteref-2414" epub:type="noteref">2414</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To you, Sir Friar, so that ye be not wroth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How that this fart should even<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2415" id="noteref-2415" epub:type="noteref">2415</a> dealed be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among your convent, if it liked thee.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Tell,” quoth the lord, “and thou shalt have anon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A gownë-cloth, by God and by Saint John.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My lord,” quoth he, “when that the weather is fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Withoutë wind, or perturbíng of air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2416" id="noteref-2416" epub:type="noteref">2416</a> bring a cart-wheel here into this hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But lookë that it have its spokës all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twelve spokës hath a cart-wheel commonly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bring me then twelve friars, know ye why?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thirteen is a convent as I guess;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2417" id="noteref-2417" epub:type="noteref">2417</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your confessór here, for his worthiness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall perform up<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2418" id="noteref-2418" epub:type="noteref">2418</a> the number of his convént.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then shall they kneel adown by one assent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to each spokë’s end, in this mannére,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full sadly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2419" id="noteref-2419" epub:type="noteref">2419</a> lay his nosë shall a frere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your noble confessór there, God him save,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall hold his nose upright under the nave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then shall this churl, with belly stiff and tought<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2420" id="noteref-2420" epub:type="noteref">2420</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As any tabour,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2421" id="noteref-2421" epub:type="noteref">2421</a> hither be y-brought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And set him on the wheel right of this cart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the nave, and make him let a fart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ye shall see, on peril of my life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By very proof that is demonstrative,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That equally the sound of it will wend,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2422" id="noteref-2422" epub:type="noteref">2422</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke the stink, unto the spokës’ end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save that this worthy man, your confessoúr</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Because he is a man of great honoúr),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall have the firstë fruit, as reason is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The noble uságe of friars yet it is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The worthy men of them shall first be served,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And certainly he hath it well deserved;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He hath to-day taught us so muchë good</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With preaching in the pulpit where he stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I may vouchësafe, I say for me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had the firstë smell of fartës three;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so would all his brethren hardily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He beareth him so fair and holily.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The lord, the lady, and each man, save the frere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saidë, that Jankin spake in this mattére</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As well as Euclid, or as Ptolemy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Touching the churl, they said that subtilty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And high wit made him speaken as he spake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is no fool, nor no demoniac.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Jankin hath y-won a newë gown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My tale is done, we are almost at town.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
