<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Monk’s Tale</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:poem">
		<section id="the-monks-tale" epub:type="division">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Monk’s Tale</h2>
			<section id="the-monks-tale-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Prologue</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When ended was my tale of Melibee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of Prudénce and her benignity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our Hostë said, “As I am faithful man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by the precious <i xml:lang="la">corpus Madrian</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4016" id="noteref-4016" epub:type="noteref">4016</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I had lever<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4017" id="noteref-4017" epub:type="noteref">4017</a> than a barrel of ale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That goodë lefe<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4018" id="noteref-4018" epub:type="noteref">4018</a> my wife had heard this tale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she is no thing of such patiénce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As was this Meliboeus’ wife Prudénce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Goddë’s bonës! when I beat my knaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She bringeth me the greatë clubbed staves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And crieth, ‘Slay the doggës every one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And break of them both back and ev’ry bone.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if that any neighëbour of mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will not in church unto my wife incline,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4019" id="noteref-4019" epub:type="noteref">4019</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or be so hardy to her to trespace,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4020" id="noteref-4020" epub:type="noteref">4020</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>When she comes home she rampeth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4021" id="noteref-4021" epub:type="noteref">4021</a> in my face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And crieth, ‘Falsë coward, wreak<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4022" id="noteref-4022" epub:type="noteref">4022</a> thy wife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By <i xml:lang="la">corpus Domini</i>, I will have thy knife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou shalt have my distaff, and go spin.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From day till night right thus she will begin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Alas!’ she saith, ‘that ever I was shape<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4023" id="noteref-4023" epub:type="noteref">4023</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wed a milksop, or a coward ape,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That will be overlad<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4024" id="noteref-4024" epub:type="noteref">4024</a> with every wight!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou darest not stand by thy wifë’s right.’</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“This is my life, but if<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4025" id="noteref-4025" epub:type="noteref">4025</a> that I will fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And out at door anon I must me dight,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4026" id="noteref-4026" epub:type="noteref">4026</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ellës I am lost, but if that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be, like a wildë lion, fool-hardý.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wot well she will do<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4027" id="noteref-4027" epub:type="noteref">4027</a> me slay some day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some neighëbour and thennë go my way;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4028" id="noteref-4028" epub:type="noteref">4028</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I am perilous with knife in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Albeit that I dare not her withstand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she is big in armës, by my faith!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That shall he find, that her misdoth or saith.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4029" id="noteref-4029" epub:type="noteref">4029</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But let us pass away from this mattére.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My lord the Monk,” quoth he, “be merry of cheer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ye shall tell a talë truëlý.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, Rochester stands here fastë by.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ride forth, mine owen lord, break not our game.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But by my troth I cannot tell your name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether shall I call you my lord Dan John,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Dan Thomas, or ellës Dan Albon?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of what house be ye, by your father’s kin?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I vow to God, thou hast a full fair skin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is a gentle pasture where thou go’st;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art not like a penant<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4030" id="noteref-4030" epub:type="noteref">4030</a> or a ghost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon my faith thou art some officer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some worthy sexton, or some cellarer.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For by my father’s soul, as to my dome,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4031" id="noteref-4031" epub:type="noteref">4031</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art a master when thou art at home;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No poorë cloisterer, nor no novíce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But a govérnor, both wily and wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therewithal, of brawnës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4032" id="noteref-4032" epub:type="noteref">4032</a> and of bones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A right well-faring person for the nonce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray to God give him confusión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That first thee brought into religión.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou would’st have been a treadë-fowl<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4033" id="noteref-4033" epub:type="noteref">4033</a> aright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hadst thou as greatë leave, as thou hast might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To perform all thy lust in engendrure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hadst begotten many a creatúre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! why wearest thou so wide a cope?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4034" id="noteref-4034" epub:type="noteref">4034</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>God give me sorrow, but, an’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4035" id="noteref-4035" epub:type="noteref">4035</a> I were pope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not only thou, but every mighty man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though he were shorn full high upon his pan,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4036" id="noteref-4036" epub:type="noteref">4036</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should have a wife; for all this world is lorn;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4037" id="noteref-4037" epub:type="noteref">4037</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Religión hath ta’en up all the corn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of treading, and we borel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4038" id="noteref-4038" epub:type="noteref">4038</a> men be shrimps:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4039" id="noteref-4039" epub:type="noteref">4039</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of feeble trees there comë wretched imps.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4040" id="noteref-4040" epub:type="noteref">4040</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>This maketh that our heirës be so slender</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And feeble, that they may not well engender.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This maketh that our wives will assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Religious folk, for they may better pay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Venus’ payëmentës than may we:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God wot, no lushëburghës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4041" id="noteref-4041" epub:type="noteref">4041</a> payë ye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But be not wroth, my lord, though that I play;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full oft in game a sooth have I heard say.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This worthy Monk took all in patiénce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said, “I will do all my diligence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As far as souneth unto honesty,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4042" id="noteref-4042" epub:type="noteref">4042</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tellë you a tale, or two or three.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if you list to hearken hitherward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will you say the life of Saint Edward;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ellës first tragédies I will tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which I have an hundred in my cell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tragédy is to say<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4043" id="noteref-4043" epub:type="noteref">4043</a> a certain story,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As oldë bookës maken us memóry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of him that stood in great prosperitý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And is y-fallen out of high degree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In misery, and endeth wretchedly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they be versifiëd commonly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of six feet, which men call hexámetron;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In prose eke be indited many a one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke in metre, in many a sundry wise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, this declaring ought enough suffice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now hearken, if ye likë for to hear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But first I you beseech in this mattére,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though I by order tellë not these things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be it of popës, emperors, or kings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After their ages,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4044" id="noteref-4044" epub:type="noteref">4044</a> as men written find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But tell them some before and some behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As it now cometh to my remembránce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have me excused of mine ignorance.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-monks-tale-main" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Tale<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4045" id="noteref-4045" epub:type="noteref">4045</a></h3>
				<p>
					<span>I will bewail, in manner of tragédy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The harm of them that stood in high degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fellë so, that there was no remédy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bring them out of their adversitý.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, certain, when that Fortune list to flee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There may no man the course of her wheel hold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let no man trust in blind prosperity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beware by these examples true and old.</span>
				</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>At <b>Lucifer</b>, though he an angel were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not a man, at him I will begin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For though Fortúnë may no angel dere,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4046" id="noteref-4046" epub:type="noteref">4046</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>From high degree yet fell he for his sin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down into hell, where as he yet is in.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Lucifer! brightest of angels all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now art thou Satanas, that may’st not twin<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4047" id="noteref-4047" epub:type="noteref">4047</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of the misery in which thou art fall.</span>
				</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>Lo <b>Adam</b>, in the field of Damascene<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4048" id="noteref-4048" epub:type="noteref">4048</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Goddë’s owen finger wrought was he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not begotten of man’s sperm unclean;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And welt<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4049" id="noteref-4049" epub:type="noteref">4049</a> all Paradise saving one tree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had never worldly man so high degree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Adam, till he for misgovernance<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4050" id="noteref-4050" epub:type="noteref">4050</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was driven out of his prosperity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To labour, and to hell, and to mischance.</span>
				</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>Lo <b>Sampson</b>, which that was annunciate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the angel, long ere his nativity;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4051" id="noteref-4051" epub:type="noteref">4051</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And was to God Almighty consecrate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stood in nobless while that he might see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was never such another as was he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To speak of strength, and thereto hardiness;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4052" id="noteref-4052" epub:type="noteref">4052</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to his wivës told he his secré,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through which he slew himself for wretchedness.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sampson, this noble and mighty champión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Withoutë weapon, save his handës tway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He slew and all to-rentë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4053" id="noteref-4053" epub:type="noteref">4053</a> the lión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toward his wedding walking by the way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His falsë wife could him so please, and pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till she his counsel knew; and she, untrue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto his foes his counsel gan bewray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And him forsook, and took another new.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Three hundred foxes Sampson took for ire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all their tailës he together band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And set the foxes’ tailës all on fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he in every tail had knit a brand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they burnt all the cornës of that lend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all their olivéres<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4054" id="noteref-4054" epub:type="noteref">4054</a> and vinës eke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand men he slew eke with his hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And had no weapon but an ass’s cheek.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When they were slain, so thirsted him, that he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was well-nigh lorn,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4055" id="noteref-4055" epub:type="noteref">4055</a> for which he gan to pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That God would on his pain have some pitý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And send him drink, or ellës must he die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of this ass’s check, that was so dry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of a wang-tooth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4056" id="noteref-4056" epub:type="noteref">4056</a> sprang anon a well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which, he drank enough, shortly to say.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus help’d him God, as <i xml:lang="la">Judicum</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4057" id="noteref-4057" epub:type="noteref">4057</a> can tell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By very force, at Gaza, on a night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Maugré the Philistines of that citý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gatës of the town he hath up plight,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4058" id="noteref-4058" epub:type="noteref">4058</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on his back y-carried them hath he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High on an hill, where as men might them see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O noble mighty Sampson, lefe<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4059" id="noteref-4059" epub:type="noteref">4059</a> and dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hadst thou not told to women thy secré,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all this world there had not been thy peer.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This Sampson never cider drank nor wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor on his head came razor none nor shear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By precept of the messenger divine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all his strengthës in his hairës were;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fully twenty winters, year by year,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had of Israel the governance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But soonë shall he weepë many a tear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For women shall him bringë to mischance.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Unto his leman<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4060" id="noteref-4060" epub:type="noteref">4060</a> Dalila<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4061" id="noteref-4061" epub:type="noteref">4061</a> he told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in his hairës all his strengthë lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And falsely to his foemen she him sold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sleeping in her barme<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4062" id="noteref-4062" epub:type="noteref">4062</a> upon a day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She made to clip or shear his hair away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made his foemen all his craft espien.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when they foundë him in this array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They bound him fast, and put out both his eyen.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, ere his hair was clipped or y-shave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was no bond with which men might him bind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now is he in prison in a cave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where as they made him at the quernë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4063" id="noteref-4063" epub:type="noteref">4063</a> grind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O noble Sampson, strongest of mankind!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O whilom judge in glory and richéss!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now may’st thou weepë with thine eyen blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since thou from weal art fall’n to wretchedness.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Th’ end of this caitiff<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4064" id="noteref-4064" epub:type="noteref">4064</a> was as I shall say;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His foemen made a feast upon a day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made him as their fool before them play;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this was in a temple of great array.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But at the last he made a foul affray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he two pillars shook, and made them fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And down fell temple and all, and there it lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And slew himself and eke his foemen all;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This is to say, the princes every one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke three thousand bodies were there slain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With falling of the great temple of stone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Sampson now will I no morë sayn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beware by this example old and plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That no man tell his counsel to his wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of such thing as he would have secret fain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that it touch his limbës or his life.</span>
				</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>Of <b>Hercules</b> the sov’reign conqueroúr</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Singë his workës’ land and high renown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in his time of strength he bare the flow’r.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He slew and reft the skin of the lioún</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He of the Centaurs laid the boast adown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He Harpies<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4065" id="noteref-4065" epub:type="noteref">4065</a> slew, the cruel birdës fell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He golden apples reft from the dragón</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He drew out Cerberus the hound of hell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He slew the cruel tyrant Busirus.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4066" id="noteref-4066" epub:type="noteref">4066</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made his horse to fret<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4067" id="noteref-4067" epub:type="noteref">4067</a> him flesh and bone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He slew the fiery serpent venomous;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Achelous’ two hornës brake he one.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he slew Cacus in a cave of stone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He slew the giant Antaeus the strong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He slew the grisly boar, and that anon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bare the heav’n upon his neckë long.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4068" id="noteref-4068" epub:type="noteref">4068</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Was never wight, since that the world began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That slew so many monsters as did he;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throughout the widë world his namë ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What for his strength, and for his high bounté;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every realmë went he for to see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was so strong that no man might him let;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At both the worldë’s ends, as saith Trophee,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4069" id="noteref-4069" epub:type="noteref">4069</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instead of boundës he a pillar set.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A leman had this noble champión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hightë Dejanira, fresh as May;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as these clerkës makë mentión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She hath him sent a shirtë fresh and gay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! this shirt, alas and well-away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Envenomed was subtilly withal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ere that he had worn it half a day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It made his flesh all from his bonës fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But natheless some clerkës her excuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By one, that hightë Nessus, that it maked;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be as he may, I will not her accuse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But on his back this shirt he wore all naked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till that his flesh was for the venom blaked.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4070" id="noteref-4070" epub:type="noteref">4070</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when he saw none other remedy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In hotë coals he hath himselfë raked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For with no venom deigned he to die.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus starf<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4071" id="noteref-4071" epub:type="noteref">4071</a> this worthy mighty Hercules.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, who may trust on Fortune any throw?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4072" id="noteref-4072" epub:type="noteref">4072</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For him that followeth all this world of pres,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4073" id="noteref-4073" epub:type="noteref">4073</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere he be ware, is often laid full low;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full wise is he that can himselfë know.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beware, for when that Fortune list to glose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then waiteth she her man to overthrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By such a way as he would least suppose.</span>
				</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>The mighty throne, the precious treasór,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The glorious sceptre, and royal majesty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That had the king <b>Nabuchodonosor</b></span>
					<br/>
					<span>With tongue unnethës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4074" id="noteref-4074" epub:type="noteref">4074</a> may described be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He twice won Jerusalem the citý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The vessels of the temple he with him lad;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4075" id="noteref-4075" epub:type="noteref">4075</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Babylonë was his sov’reign see,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4076" id="noteref-4076" epub:type="noteref">4076</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which his glory and delight he had.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The fairest children of the blood royál</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Israel he did do<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4077" id="noteref-4077" epub:type="noteref">4077</a> geld anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And maked each of them to be his thrall.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4078" id="noteref-4078" epub:type="noteref">4078</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amongës others Daniel was one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was the wisest child of every one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he the dreamës of the king expounded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where in Chaldaea clerkë was there none</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That wistë to what fine<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4079" id="noteref-4079" epub:type="noteref">4079</a> his dreamës sounded.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This proudë king let make a statue of gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sixty cubitës long, and seven in bread’,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To which imagë bothë young and old</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Commanded he to lout,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4080" id="noteref-4080" epub:type="noteref">4080</a> and have in dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or in a furnace, full of flamës red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He should be burnt that wouldë not obey:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But never would assentë to that deed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Daniel, nor his youngë fellows tway.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This king of kingës proud was and elate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He ween’d<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4081" id="noteref-4081" epub:type="noteref">4081</a> that God, that sits in majesty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mightë him not bereave of his estate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But suddenly he lost his dignity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And like a beast he seemed for to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ate hay as an ox, and lay thereout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In rain, with wildë beastës walked he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till certain time was y-come about.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And like an eagle’s feathers wax’d his hairs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His nailës like a birdë’s clawës were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till God released him at certain years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gave him wit; and then with many a tear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He thanked God, and ever his life in fear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was he to do amiss, or more trespace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And till that time he laid was on his bier,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He knew that God was full of might and grace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His sonë, which that hightë <b>Balthasar</b>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That held the regne<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4082" id="noteref-4082" epub:type="noteref">4082</a> after his father’s day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He by his father couldë not beware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For proud he was of heart and of array;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke an idolaster was he aye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His high estate assured<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4083" id="noteref-4083" epub:type="noteref">4083</a> him in pride;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Fortune cast him down, and there he lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And suddenly his regnë gan divide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A feast he made unto his lordës all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a time, and made them blithë be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then his officérës gan he call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Go, bringë forth the vessels,” saidë he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Which that my father in his prosperity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of the temple of Jerusalem reft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to our highë goddës thankë we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of honour, that our elders<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4084" id="noteref-4084" epub:type="noteref">4084</a> with us left.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His wife, his lordës, and his concubines</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye drankë, while their appetites did last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of these noble vessels sundry wines.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on a wall this king his eyen cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saw an hand, armless, that wrote full fast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For fear of which he quaked, and sighed sore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This hand, that Balthasar so sore aghast,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4085" id="noteref-4085" epub:type="noteref">4085</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrote <i>Mane, tekel, phares</i>, and no more.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In all that land magician was there none</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That could expoundë what this letter meant.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Daniel expounded it anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said, “O King, God to thy father lent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glory and honour, regnë, treasure, rent;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4086" id="noteref-4086" epub:type="noteref">4086</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he was proud, and nothing God he drad;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4087" id="noteref-4087" epub:type="noteref">4087</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore God great wreche<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4088" id="noteref-4088" epub:type="noteref">4088</a> upon him sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And him bereft the regnë that he had.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“He was cast out of mannë’s company;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With asses was his habitatión;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ate hay, as a beast, in wet and dry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till that he knew by grace and by reasón</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That God of heaven hath dominatión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er every regne, and every creatúre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then had God of him compassión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And him restor’d his regne and his figúre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Eke thou, that art his son, art proud also,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And knowest all these thingës verily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And art rebel to God, and art his foe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou drankest of his vessels boldëly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy wife eke, and thy wenches, sinfully</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drank of the samë vessels sundry winës,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heried<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4089" id="noteref-4089" epub:type="noteref">4089</a> falsë goddës cursedly;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4090" id="noteref-4090" epub:type="noteref">4090</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore to thee y-shapen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4091" id="noteref-4091" epub:type="noteref">4091</a> full great pine<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4092" id="noteref-4092" epub:type="noteref">4092</a> is.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“This hand was sent from God, that on the wall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrote <i>Mane, tekel, phares</i>, trustë me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy reign is done; thou weighest naught at all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Divided is thy regne, and it shall be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Medës and to Persians giv’n,” quoth he.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thilkë samë night this king was slaw;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4093" id="noteref-4093" epub:type="noteref">4093</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Darius occupied his degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though he thereto had neither right nor law.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lordings, example hereby may ye take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How that in lordship<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4094" id="noteref-4094" epub:type="noteref">4094</a> is no sickerness;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4095" id="noteref-4095" epub:type="noteref">4095</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For when that Fortune will a man forsake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She bears away his regne and his richéss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke his friendës bothë more and less.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For what man that hath friendës through fortúne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mishap will make them enemies, I guess;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This proverb is full sooth, and full commúne.</span>
				</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span><b>Zenobia</b>, of Palmyrie the queen,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4096" id="noteref-4096" epub:type="noteref">4096</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As writë Persians of her nobléss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So worthy was in armës, and so keen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That no wight passed her in hardiness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor in lineage, nor other gentleness.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4097" id="noteref-4097" epub:type="noteref">4097</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the king’s blood of Perse<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4098" id="noteref-4098" epub:type="noteref">4098</a> is she descended;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say not that she haddë most fairnéss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But of her shape she might not he amended.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From her childhood I findë that she fled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Office of woman, and to woods she went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many a wildë hartë’s blood she shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With arrows broad that she against them sent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was so swift, that she anon them hent.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4099" id="noteref-4099" epub:type="noteref">4099</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when that she was older, she would kill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lions, leopárds, and bearës all to-rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in her armës wield them at her will.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She durst the wildë beastës’ dennës seek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And runnen in the mountains all the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sleep under a bush; and she could eke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrestle by very force and very might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With any young man, were he ne’er so wight;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4100" id="noteref-4100" epub:type="noteref">4100</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>There mightë nothing in her armës stond.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She kept her maidenhood from every wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To no man deigned she for to be bond.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But at the last her friendës have her married</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Odenate,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4101" id="noteref-4101" epub:type="noteref">4101</a> a prince of that countrý;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All were it so, that she them longë tarried.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ye shall understandë how that he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haddë such fantasies as haddë she;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But natheless, when they were knit in fere,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4102" id="noteref-4102" epub:type="noteref">4102</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>They liv’d in joy, and in felicity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For each of them had other lefe<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4103" id="noteref-4103" epub:type="noteref">4103</a> and dear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Save one thing, that she never would assent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By no way, that he shouldë by her lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But onës, for it was her plain intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To have a child, the world to multiply;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all so soon as that she might espy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she was not with childë by that deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then would she suffer him do his fantasy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eftsoon,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4104" id="noteref-4104" epub:type="noteref">4104</a> and not but onës, out of dread.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4105" id="noteref-4105" epub:type="noteref">4105</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And if she were with child at thilkë cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No morë should he playë thilkë game</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till fully forty dayës werë past;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then would she once suffer him do the same.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4106" id="noteref-4106" epub:type="noteref">4106</a> were this Odenatus wild or tame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He got no more of her; for thus she said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was to wivës lechery and shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In other case<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4107" id="noteref-4107" epub:type="noteref">4107</a> if that men with them play’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Two sonës, by this Odenate had she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which she kept in virtue and lettrure.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4108" id="noteref-4108" epub:type="noteref">4108</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now unto our talë turnë we;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say, so worshipful a creatúre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wise therewith, and largë with measúre,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4109" id="noteref-4109" epub:type="noteref">4109</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>So penible<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4110" id="noteref-4110" epub:type="noteref">4110</a> in the war, and courteous eke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor more labour might in war endure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was none, though all this worldë men should seek.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her rich array it mightë not be told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As well in vessel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4111" id="noteref-4111" epub:type="noteref">4111</a> as in her clothíng:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was all clad in pierrie<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4112" id="noteref-4112" epub:type="noteref">4112</a> and in gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke she leftë not,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4113" id="noteref-4113" epub:type="noteref">4113</a> for no huntíng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To have of sundry tonguës full knowíng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that she leisure had, and for t’ intend<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4114" id="noteref-4114" epub:type="noteref">4114</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To learnë bookës was all her likíng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How she in virtue might her life dispend.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, shortly of this story for to treat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So doughty was her husband and eke she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they conquered many regnës great</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In th’ Orient, with many a fair city</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Appertinent unto the majesty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Rome, and with strong handë held them fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor ever might their foemen do<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4115" id="noteref-4115" epub:type="noteref">4115</a> them flee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye while that Odenatus’ dayës last’.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her battles, whoso list them for to read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against Sapor the king,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4116" id="noteref-4116" epub:type="noteref">4116</a> and other mo’,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how that all this process fell in deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why she conquér’d, and what title thereto,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after of her mischief<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4117" id="noteref-4117" epub:type="noteref">4117</a> and her woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How that she was besieged and y-take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let him unto my master Petrarch go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That writes enough of this, I undertake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When Odenate was dead, she mightily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The regnë held, and with her proper hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against her foes she fought so cruelly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That there n’as<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4118" id="noteref-4118" epub:type="noteref">4118</a> king nor prince in all that land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was not glad, if be that gracë fand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she would not upon his land warray;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4119" id="noteref-4119" epub:type="noteref">4119</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>With her they maden álliánce by bond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be in peace, and let her ride and play.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The emperor of Romë, Claudius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor, him before, the Roman Gallien,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Durstë never be so courageoús,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor no Armenian, nor Egyptien,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor Syrian, nor no Arabien,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within the fieldë durstë with her fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest that she would them with her handës slén,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4120" id="noteref-4120" epub:type="noteref">4120</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or with her meinie<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4121" id="noteref-4121" epub:type="noteref">4121</a> puttë them to flight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In kingës’ habit went her sonës two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As heirës of their father’s regnës all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Herëmanno and Timolaó</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their namës were, as Persians them call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But aye Fortúne hath in her honey gall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This mighty queenë may no while endure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fortune out of her regnë made her fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wretchedness and to misádventúre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Aurelian, when that the governánce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Romë came into his handës tway,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4122" id="noteref-4122" epub:type="noteref">4122</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shope<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4123" id="noteref-4123" epub:type="noteref">4123</a> upon this queen to do vengeánce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with his legións he took his way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toward Zenobie, and, shortly for to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He made her flee, and at the last her hent,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4124" id="noteref-4124" epub:type="noteref">4124</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fetter’d her, and eke her children tway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And won the land, and home to Rome he went.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Amongës other thingës that he wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her car, that was with gold wrought and pierrie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This greatë Roman, this Aurelian</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath with him led, for that men should it see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before in his triumphë walked she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With giltë chains upon her neck hangíng;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crowned she was, as after<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4125" id="noteref-4125" epub:type="noteref">4125</a> her degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And full of pierrie charged<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4126" id="noteref-4126" epub:type="noteref">4126</a> her clothíng.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Alas, Fortúnë! she that whilom was</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dreadful to kingës and to emperoúrs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now galeth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4127" id="noteref-4127" epub:type="noteref">4127</a> all the people on her, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she that helmed was in starkë stowres,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4128" id="noteref-4128" epub:type="noteref">4128</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And won by forcë townës strong and tow’rs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall on her head now wear a vitremite;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4129" id="noteref-4129" epub:type="noteref">4129</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she that bare the sceptre full of flow’rs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall bear a distaff, her cost for to quite.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4130" id="noteref-4130" epub:type="noteref">4130</a></span>
				</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>Although that <b>Nero</b> were so vicious</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As any fiend that lies full low adown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet he, as telleth us Suetonius,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4131" id="noteref-4131" epub:type="noteref">4131</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>This widë world had in subjectioún,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both East and West, South and Septentrioún.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of rubies, sapphires, and of pearlës white</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were all his clothes embroider’d up and down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he in gemmës greatly gan delight.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>More delicate, more pompous of array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More proud, was never emperor than he;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ilkë cloth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4132" id="noteref-4132" epub:type="noteref">4132</a> that he had worn one day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After that time he would it never see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nettës of gold thread had he great plentý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To fish in Tiber, when him list to play;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His lustës were as law, in his degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Fortune as his friend would him obey.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He Romë burnt for his délicacý;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4133" id="noteref-4133" epub:type="noteref">4133</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The senators he slew upon a day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hearë how that men would weep and cry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And slew his brother, and by his sister lay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His mother made he in piteous array;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he her wombë slittë, to behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where he conceived was; so well-away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he so little of his mother told.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4134" id="noteref-4134" epub:type="noteref">4134</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>No tear out of his eyen for that sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came; but he said, a fair woman was she.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great wonder is, how that he could or might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be doomësman<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4135" id="noteref-4135" epub:type="noteref">4135</a> of her deadë beautý:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wine to bringë him commanded he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drank anon; none other woe he made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When might is joined unto cruelty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! too deepë will the venom wade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In youth a master had this emperoúr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To teachë him lettrure<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4136" id="noteref-4136" epub:type="noteref">4136</a> and courtesy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For of morality he was the flow’r,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in his timë, but if<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4137" id="noteref-4137" epub:type="noteref">4137</a> bookës lie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And while this master had of him mast’rý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He made him so conning and so souple,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4138" id="noteref-4138" epub:type="noteref">4138</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That longë time it was ere tyranný,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or any vicë, durst in him uncouple.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4139" id="noteref-4139" epub:type="noteref">4139</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This Seneca, of which that I devise,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4140" id="noteref-4140" epub:type="noteref">4140</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because Nero had of him suchë dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he from vices would him aye chastise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Discreetly, as by word, and not by deed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Sir,” he would say, “an emperor must need</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be virtuous, and hatë tyranny.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which he made him in a bath to bleed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On both his armës, till he mustë die.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This Nero had eke of a custumance<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4141" id="noteref-4141" epub:type="noteref">4141</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>In youth against his master for to rise;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4142" id="noteref-4142" epub:type="noteref">4142</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which afterward he thought a great grievánce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore he made him dien in this wise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But natheless this Seneca the wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chose in a bath to die in this mannére,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rather than have another tormentise;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4143" id="noteref-4143" epub:type="noteref">4143</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus hath Nero slain his master dear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now fell it so, that Fortune list no longer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The highë pride of Nero to cherice;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4144" id="noteref-4144" epub:type="noteref">4144</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For though he werë strong, yet was she stronger.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She thoughtë thus; “By God, I am too nice<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4145" id="noteref-4145" epub:type="noteref">4145</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To set a man, that is full fill’d of vice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In high degree, and emperor him call!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By God, out of his seat I will him trice!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4146" id="noteref-4146" epub:type="noteref">4146</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he least weeneth,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4147" id="noteref-4147" epub:type="noteref">4147</a> soonest shall he fall.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The people rose upon him on a night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For his default; and when he it espied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of his doors anon he hath him dight<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4148" id="noteref-4148" epub:type="noteref">4148</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone, and where he ween’d t’ have been allied,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4149" id="noteref-4149" epub:type="noteref">4149</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He knocked fast, and aye the more he cried</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The faster shuttë they their doorës all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then wist he well he had himself misgied,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4150" id="noteref-4150" epub:type="noteref">4150</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And went his way, no longer durst he call.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The people cried and rumbled up and down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That with his earës heard he how they said;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Where is this falsë tyrant, this Neroún?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For fear almost out of his wit he braid,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4151" id="noteref-4151" epub:type="noteref">4151</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to his goddës piteously he pray’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For succour, but it mightë not betide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For dread of this he thoughtë that died,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ran into a garden him to hide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And in this garden found he churlës tway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That sattë by a firë great and red;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to these churlës two he gan to pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To slay him, and to girden<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4152" id="noteref-4152" epub:type="noteref">4152</a> off his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That to his body, when that he were dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were no despitë done for his defame.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4153" id="noteref-4153" epub:type="noteref">4153</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Himself he slew, he coud no better rede;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4154" id="noteref-4154" epub:type="noteref">4154</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which Fortúnë laugh’d and haddë game.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4155" id="noteref-4155" epub:type="noteref">4155</a></span>
				</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>Was never capitain under a king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That regnës more put in subjectioún,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor stronger was in field of allë thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in his time, nor greater of renown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor more pompous in high presumptioún,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than <b>Holofernes</b>, whom Fortúne aye kiss’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So lik’rously, and led him up and down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till that his head was off ere that he wist.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Not only that this world had of him awe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For losing of richéss and liberty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he made every man reny his law.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4156" id="noteref-4156" epub:type="noteref">4156</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nabuchodónosór was God, said he;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>None other Goddë should honoúred be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against his hest<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4157" id="noteref-4157" epub:type="noteref">4157</a> there dare no wight trespace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save in Bethulia, a strong citý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where Eliáchim priest was of that place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But take keep<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4158" id="noteref-4158" epub:type="noteref">4158</a> of the death of Holofern;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid his host he drunken lay at night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within his tentë, large as is a bern;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4159" id="noteref-4159" epub:type="noteref">4159</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet, for all his pomp and all his might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Judith, a woman, as he lay upright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sleeping, his head off smote, and from his tent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full privily she stole from every wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with his head unto her town she went.</span>
				</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>What needeth it of king <b>Antiochus</b><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4160" id="noteref-4160" epub:type="noteref">4160</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tell his high and royal majesty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His great pride, and his workës venomous?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For such another was there none as he;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Readë what that he was in Maccabee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And read the proudë wordës that he said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And why he fell from his prosperity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in an hill how wretchedly he died.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fortúne him had enhanced so in pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That verily he ween’d he might attain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the starrës upon every side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in a balance weighen each mountáin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the floodës of the sea restrain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Goddë’s people had he most in hate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Them would he slay in torment and in pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weening that God might not his pride abate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And for that Nicanor and Timothee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Jewës werë vanquish’d mightily,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4161" id="noteref-4161" epub:type="noteref">4161</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the Jewës such an hate had he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he bade graith his car<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4162" id="noteref-4162" epub:type="noteref">4162</a> full hastily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And swore and saidë full dispiteously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto Jerusalem he would eftsoon,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4163" id="noteref-4163" epub:type="noteref">4163</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wreak his ire on it full cruelly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But of his purpose was he let<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4164" id="noteref-4164" epub:type="noteref">4164</a> full soon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>God for his menace him so sorë smote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With invisíble wound incurable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in his guttës carf it so and bote,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4165" id="noteref-4165" epub:type="noteref">4165</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till that his painës were importable;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4166" id="noteref-4166" epub:type="noteref">4166</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And certainly the wreche<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4167" id="noteref-4167" epub:type="noteref">4167</a> was reasonable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For many a mannë’s guttës did he pain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But from his purpose, curs’d<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4168" id="noteref-4168" epub:type="noteref">4168</a> and damnable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all his smart he would him not restrain;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But bade anon apparailë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4169" id="noteref-4169" epub:type="noteref">4169</a> his host.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And suddenly, ere he was of it ware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God daunted all his pride, and all his boast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he so sorë fell out of his chare,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4170" id="noteref-4170" epub:type="noteref">4170</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it his limbës and his skin to-tare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that he neither mightë go nor ride;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in a chairë men about him bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Allë forbruised bothë back and side.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The wreche<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4171" id="noteref-4171" epub:type="noteref">4171</a> of God him smote so cruelly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That through his body wicked wormës crept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therewithal he stank so horribly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That none of all his meinie<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4172" id="noteref-4172" epub:type="noteref">4172</a> that him kept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether so that he woke or ellës slept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne mightë not of him the stink endure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this mischíef he wailed and eke wept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And knew God Lord of every creatúre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To all his host, and to himself also,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full wlatsom<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4173" id="noteref-4173" epub:type="noteref">4173</a> was the stink of his carráin;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4174" id="noteref-4174" epub:type="noteref">4174</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>No mannë might him bearë to and fro.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in this stink, and this horríble pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He starf<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4175" id="noteref-4175" epub:type="noteref">4175</a> full wretchedly in a mountáin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus hath this robber, and this homicide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That many a mannë made to weep and plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such guerdon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4176" id="noteref-4176" epub:type="noteref">4176</a> as belongeth unto pride.</span>
				</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>The story of <b>Alexander</b> is so commúne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ev’ry wight that hath discretioún</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath heard somewhat or all of his fortúne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This widë world, as in conclusioún,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4177" id="noteref-4177" epub:type="noteref">4177</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He won by strength; or, for his high renown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They werë glad for peace to him to send.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pride and boast of man he laid adown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereso he came, unto the worldë’s end.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Comparison yet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4178" id="noteref-4178" epub:type="noteref">4178</a> never might be maked</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between him and another conqueroúr;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all this world for dread of him had quaked;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was of knighthood and of freedom flow’r:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fortúne him made the heir of her honoúr.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save wine and women, nothing might assuage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His high intent in armës and laboúr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So was he full of leonine couráge.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>What praise were it to him, though I you told</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Darius, and a hundred thousand mo’,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of kingës, princes, dukes, and earlës bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which he conquér’d, and brought them into woe?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say, as far as man may ride or go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The world was his, why should I more devise?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4179" id="noteref-4179" epub:type="noteref">4179</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, though I wrote or told you evermo’,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his knighthood it mightë not suffice.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Twelve years he reigned, as saith Maccabee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Philippe’s son of Macedon he was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That first was king in Greecë the countrý.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O worthy gentle<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4180" id="noteref-4180" epub:type="noteref">4180</a> Alexander, alas</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ever should thee fallë such a case!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Empoison’d of thine owen folk thou were;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy six<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4181" id="noteref-4181" epub:type="noteref">4181</a> Fortúne hath turn’d into an ace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet for thee she weptë never a tear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who shall me givë tearës to complain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The death of gentiléss, and of franchise,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4182" id="noteref-4182" epub:type="noteref">4182</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all this worldë had in his demaine,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4183" id="noteref-4183" epub:type="noteref">4183</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet he thought it mightë not suffice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So full was his coráge<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4184" id="noteref-4184" epub:type="noteref">4184</a> of high emprise?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! who shall me helpë to indite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Falsë Fortúne, and poison to despise?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whichë two of all this woe I wite.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4185" id="noteref-4185" epub:type="noteref">4185</a></span>
				</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>By wisdom, manhood, and by great laboúr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From humbleness to royal majesty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up rose he, <b>Julius</b> the Conqueroúr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That won all th’ Occident,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4186" id="noteref-4186" epub:type="noteref">4186</a> by land and sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By strength of hand or ellës by treatý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And unto Romë made them tributáry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And since<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4187" id="noteref-4187" epub:type="noteref">4187</a> of Rome the emperor was he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till that Fortúnë wax’d his adversáry.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O mighty Caesar, that in Thessaly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against <b>Pompeius</b>, father thine in law,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4188" id="noteref-4188" epub:type="noteref">4188</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of th’ Oriént had all the chivalry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As far as that the day begins to daw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That through thy knighthood hast them take and slaw,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4189" id="noteref-4189" epub:type="noteref">4189</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save fewë folk that with Pompeius fled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through which thou put all th’ Orient in awe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thankë Fortúnë that so well thee sped.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But now a little while I will bewail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Pompeius, this noble governór</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Romë, which that fled at this battaile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say, one of his men, a false traitór,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His head off smote, to winnë him favór</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Julius, and him the head he brought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! Pompey, of th’ Orient conquerór,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Fortune unto such a fine<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4190" id="noteref-4190" epub:type="noteref">4190</a> thee brought!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To Rome again repaired Julius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his triumphë laureate full high;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But on a time Brutus and Cassius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ever had of his estate envý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full privily have made conspiracý</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against this Julius in subtle wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cast<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4191" id="noteref-4191" epub:type="noteref">4191</a> the place in which he shouldë die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With bodëkins,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4192" id="noteref-4192" epub:type="noteref">4192</a> as I shall you devise.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4193" id="noteref-4193" epub:type="noteref">4193</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This Julius to the Capitólë went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a day, as he was wont to gon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the Capitol anon him hent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4194" id="noteref-4194" epub:type="noteref">4194</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>This falsë Brutus, and his other fone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sticked him with bodëkins anon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With many a wound, and thus they let him lie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But never groan’d he at no stroke but one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or else at two, but if<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4195" id="noteref-4195" epub:type="noteref">4195</a> the story lie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>So manly was this Julius of heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so well lov’d estately honesty,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4196" id="noteref-4196" epub:type="noteref">4196</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, though his deadly woundës sorë smert,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4197" id="noteref-4197" epub:type="noteref">4197</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>His mantle o’er his hippës castë he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That no man shouldë see his privity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as he lay a-dying in a trance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wistë verily that dead was he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of honesty yet had he remembránce.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lucan, to thee this story I recommend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to Sueton’, and Valerie also,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of this story writë word and end;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4198" id="noteref-4198" epub:type="noteref">4198</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>How that to these great conquerórës two</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fortune was first a friend, and since<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4199" id="noteref-4199" epub:type="noteref">4199</a> a foe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No mannë trust upon her favour long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But have her in await<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4200" id="noteref-4200" epub:type="noteref">4200</a> for evermo’;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Witness on all these conquerórës strong.</span>
				</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>The richë <b>Croesus</b>, whilom king of Lyde⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which Croesus Cyrus him sorë drad⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4201" id="noteref-4201" epub:type="noteref">4201</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet was he caught amiddës all his pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to be burnt men to the fire him lad;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4202" id="noteref-4202" epub:type="noteref">4202</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But such a rain down from the welkin shad,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4203" id="noteref-4203" epub:type="noteref">4203</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That slew the fire, and made him to escape:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to beware no gracë yet he had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till fortune on the gallows made him gape.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When he escaped was, he could not stint<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4204" id="noteref-4204" epub:type="noteref">4204</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For to begin a newë war again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He weened well, for<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4205" id="noteref-4205" epub:type="noteref">4205</a> that Fortúne him sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such hap, that he escaped through the rain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of his foes he mightë not be slain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke a sweven<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4206" id="noteref-4206" epub:type="noteref">4206</a> on a night he mette,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4207" id="noteref-4207" epub:type="noteref">4207</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which he was so proud, and eke so fain,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4208" id="noteref-4208" epub:type="noteref">4208</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he in vengeance all his heartë set.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Upon a tree he was set, as he thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where Jupiter him wash’d, both back and side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Phoebus eke a fair towél him brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dry him with; and therefore wax’d his pride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to his daughter that stood him beside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which he knew in high science to abound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He bade her tell him what it signified;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she his dream began right thus expound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“The tree,” quoth she, “the gallows is to mean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Jupiter betokens snow and rain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Phoebus, with his towel clear and clean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These be the sunnë’s streamës,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4209" id="noteref-4209" epub:type="noteref">4209</a> sooth to sayn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt y-hangeth be, father, certáin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rain shall thee wash, and sunnë shall thee dry.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus warned him full plat and eke full plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His daughter, which that called was Phaníe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span id="the-monks-tale-line-783">And hanged was Croesus the proudë king;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His royal thronë might him not avail.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tragédy is none other manner thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor can in singing crien nor bewail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for that Fortune all day will assail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With unware stroke the regnës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4210" id="noteref-4210" epub:type="noteref">4210</a> that be proud:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For when men trustë her, then will she fail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cover her bright facë with a cloud.</span>
				</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>O noble, O worthy <b>Pedro</b>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4211" id="noteref-4211" epub:type="noteref">4211</a> glory <b>of Spain</b>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom Fortune held so high in majesty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well oughtë men thy piteous death complain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of thy land thy brother made thee flee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after, at a siege, by subtlety,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wert betray’d, and led unto his tent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where as he with his owen hand slew thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Succeeding in thy regne and in thy rent.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4212" id="noteref-4212" epub:type="noteref">4212</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The field of snow, with th’ eagle of black therein,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Caught with the lion, red-colour’d as the glede,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4213" id="noteref-4213" epub:type="noteref">4213</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He brew’d this cursedness,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4214" id="noteref-4214" epub:type="noteref">4214</a> and all this sin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wicked nest was worker of this deed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not Charlës’ Oliver,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4215" id="noteref-4215" epub:type="noteref">4215</a> that took aye heed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of truth and honour, but of Armorike</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ganilion Oliver, corrupt for meed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Broughtë this worthy king in such a brike.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4216" id="noteref-4216" epub:type="noteref">4216</a></span>
				</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>O worthy <b>Petro</b>, King of <b>Cypre</b>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4217" id="noteref-4217" epub:type="noteref">4217</a> also,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Alexandre won by high mast’ry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full many a heathen wroughtest thou full woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which thine owen lieges had envý;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, for no thing but for thy chivalry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They in thy bed have slain thee by the morrow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus can Fortúne her wheel govérn and gie,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4218" id="noteref-4218" epub:type="noteref">4218</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And out of joy bringë men into sorrow.</span>
				</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>Of Milan greatë <b>Barnabo Viscount</b>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God of delight, and scourge of Lombardy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should I not thine infortúne account,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4219" id="noteref-4219" epub:type="noteref">4219</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since in estate thou clomben wert so high?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy brother’s son, that was thy double allý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he thy nephew was and son-in-law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within his prison madë thee to die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But why, nor how, n’ot<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4220" id="noteref-4220" epub:type="noteref">4220</a> I that thou were slaw.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4221" id="noteref-4221" epub:type="noteref">4221</a></span>
				</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>Of th’ Earl <b>Hugolin of Pise</b> the languoúr<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4222" id="noteref-4222" epub:type="noteref">4222</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>There may no tonguë tellë for pitý.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But little out of Pisa stands a tow’r,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In whichë tow’r in prison put was he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aud with him be his little children three;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The eldest scarcely five years was of age;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! Fortúne, it was great crueltý</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such birdës for to put in such a cage.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Damned was he to die in that prisón;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Roger, which that bishop was of Pise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had on him made a false suggestión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through which the people gan upon him rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And put him in prisón, in such a wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ye have heard; and meat and drink he had</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So small, that well unneth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4223" id="noteref-4223" epub:type="noteref">4223</a> it might suffice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therewithal it was full poor and bad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And on a day befell, that in that hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that his meatë wont was to be brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The jailor shut the doorës of the tow’r;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He heard it right well, but he spakë nought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his heart anon there fell a thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they for hunger wouldë do him dien;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4224" id="noteref-4224" epub:type="noteref">4224</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Alas!” quoth he, “alas that I was wrought!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4225" id="noteref-4225" epub:type="noteref">4225</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therewith the tearës fellë from his eyen.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His youngest son, that three years was of age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto him said, “Father, why do ye weep?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When will the jailor bringen our pottáge?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is there no morsel bread that ye do keep?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am so hungry, that I may not sleep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now wouldë God that I might sleepen ever!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then should not hunger in my wombë creep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no thing, save bread, that one were lever.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4226" id="noteref-4226" epub:type="noteref">4226</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus day by day this child begun to cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till in his father’s barme<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4227" id="noteref-4227" epub:type="noteref">4227</a> adown he lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saidë, “Farewell, father, I must die;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And kiss’d his father, and died the samë day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when the woeful father did it sey,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4228" id="noteref-4228" epub:type="noteref">4228</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For woe his armës two he gan to bite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said, “Alas! Fortúne, and well-away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thy false wheel my woe all may I wite.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4229" id="noteref-4229" epub:type="noteref">4229</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His children ween’d<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4230" id="noteref-4230" epub:type="noteref">4230</a> that it for hunger was</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he his armës gnaw’d, and not for woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saidë, “Father, do not so, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But rather eat the flesh upon us two.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our flesh thou gave us, our flesh take us fro’,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eat enough;” right thus they to him said.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after that, within a day or two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They laid them in his lap adown, and died.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Himself, despaired, eke for hunger starf.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4231" id="noteref-4231" epub:type="noteref">4231</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus ended is this Earl of Pise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From high estate Fortúne away him carf.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4232" id="noteref-4232" epub:type="noteref">4232</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this tragédy it ought enough suffice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whoso will hear it in a longer wise,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4233" id="noteref-4233" epub:type="noteref">4233</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Readë the greatë poet of Itále,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Dante hight, for he can it devise<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4234" id="noteref-4234" epub:type="noteref">4234</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>From point to point, not one word will he fail.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
