<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Doctor’s Tale</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-doctors-tale" epub:type="division z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Doctor’s Tale</h2>
			<section id="the-doctors-tale-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Prologue<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3419" id="noteref-3419" epub:type="noteref">3419</a></h3>
				<p>
					<span>[“Yea, let that passë,” quoth our Host, “as now.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sir Doctor of Physík, I prayë you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell us a tale of some honést mattére.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“It shall be done, if that ye will it hear,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said this Doctór; and his tale gan anon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now, good men,” quoth he, “hearken everyone.”]</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-doctors-tale-main" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Tale</h3>
				<p>
					<span>There was, as telleth Titus Livius,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3420" id="noteref-3420" epub:type="noteref">3420</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>A knight, that called was Virginius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full filled of honoúr and worthiness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And strong of friendës, and of great richéss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This knight one daughter haddë by his wife;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No children had he more in all his life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair was this maid in excellent beautý</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aboven ev’ry wight that man may see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For nature had with sov’reign diligence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Y-formed her in so great excellence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As though she wouldë say, “Lo, I, Natúre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus can I form and paint a creatúre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that me list; who can me counterfeit?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pygmalion? not though he aye forge and beat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or grave or paintë: for I dare well sayn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apelles, Zeuxis, shouldë work in vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Either to grave, or paint, or forge, or beat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If they presumed me to counterfeit.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he that is the former principal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath madë me his vicar-general</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To form and painten earthly creatúrës</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right as me list, and all thing in my cure<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3421" id="noteref-3421" epub:type="noteref">3421</a> is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the moonë, that may wane and wax.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for my work right nothing will I ax;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3422" id="noteref-3422" epub:type="noteref">3422</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>My lord and I be full of one accord.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I made her to the worship<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3423" id="noteref-3423" epub:type="noteref">3423</a> of my lord;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So do I all mine other creatúres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What colour that they have, or what figúres.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus seemeth me that Nature wouldë say.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This maiden was of age twelve year and tway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which that Nature haddë such delight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For right as she can paint a lily white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And red a rose, right with such paintúre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She painted had this noble creatúre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere she was born, upon her limbës free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where as by right such colours shouldë be:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Phoebus dyed had her tresses great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to the streamës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3424" id="noteref-3424" epub:type="noteref">3424</a> of his burned heat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if that excellent was her beautý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand-fold more virtuous was she.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In her there lacked no conditión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is to praise, as by discretión.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As well in ghost<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3425" id="noteref-3425" epub:type="noteref">3425</a> as body chaste was she:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which she flower’d in virginitý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all humility and abstinence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With allë temperance and patience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With measure<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3426" id="noteref-3426" epub:type="noteref">3426</a> eke of bearing and array.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Discreet she was in answering alway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though she were wise as Pallas, dare I sayn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her faconde<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3427" id="noteref-3427" epub:type="noteref">3427</a> eke full womanly and plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No counterfeited termës haddë she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To seemë wise; but after her degree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She spake, and all her wordës more and less</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sounding in virtue and in gentleness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shamefast she was in maiden’s shamefastness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Constant in heart, and ever in business<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3428" id="noteref-3428" epub:type="noteref">3428</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To drive her out of idle sluggardy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bacchus had of her mouth right no mast’rý.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For wine and slothë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3429" id="noteref-3429" epub:type="noteref">3429</a> do Venús increase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As men in fire will casten oil and grease.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of her owen virtue, unconstrain’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She had herself full often sick y-feign’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that she wouldë flee the company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where likely was to treaten of follý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As is at feasts, at revels, and at dances,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That be occasións of dalliánces.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such thingës makë children for to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too soonë ripe and bold, as men may see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which is full perilous, and hath been yore;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3430" id="noteref-3430" epub:type="noteref">3430</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all too soonë may she learnë lore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of boldëness, when that she is a wife.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And ye mistrésses,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3431" id="noteref-3431" epub:type="noteref">3431</a> in your oldë life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That lordës’ daughters have in governánce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Takë not of my wordës displeasánce:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thinkë that ye be set in governings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of lordës’ daughters only for two things;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Either for ye have kept your honesty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or else for ye have fallen in frailtý</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And knowë well enough the oldë dance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And have forsaken fully such meschance<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3432" id="noteref-3432" epub:type="noteref">3432</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For evermore; therefore, for Christë’s sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To teach them virtue look that ye not slake.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3433" id="noteref-3433" epub:type="noteref">3433</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thief of venison, that hath forlaft<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3434" id="noteref-3434" epub:type="noteref">3434</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>His lik’rousness,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3435" id="noteref-3435" epub:type="noteref">3435</a> and all his oldë craft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can keep a forest best of any man;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now keep them well, for if ye will ye can.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look well, that ye unto no vice assent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest ye be damned for your wick’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3436" id="noteref-3436" epub:type="noteref">3436</a> intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For whoso doth, a traitor is certáin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And takë keep<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3437" id="noteref-3437" epub:type="noteref">3437</a> of that I shall you sayn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of allë treason, sov’reign pestilence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is when a wight betrayeth innocence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye fathers, and ye mothers eke also,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though ye have children, be it one or mo’,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yours is the charge of all their surveyance,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3438" id="noteref-3438" epub:type="noteref">3438</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>While that they be under your governance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beware, that by example of your livíng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or by your negligence in chastisíng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they not perish for I dare well say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that they do, ye shall it dear abeye.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3439" id="noteref-3439" epub:type="noteref">3439</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under a shepherd soft and negligent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wolf hath many a sheep and lamb to-rent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sufficë this example now as here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I must turn again to my mattére.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This maid, of which I tell my tale express,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She kept herself, her needed no mistréss;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in her living maidens mightë read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in a book, ev’ry good word and deed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That longeth to a maiden virtuous;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was so prudent and so bounteous.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which the fame out sprang on every side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both of her beauty and her bounté<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3440" id="noteref-3440" epub:type="noteref">3440</a> wide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That through the land they praised her each one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That loved virtue, save envý alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That sorry is of other mannë’s weal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And glad is of his sorrow and unheal<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3441" id="noteref-3441" epub:type="noteref">3441</a>⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Doctor maketh this descriptioún.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3442" id="noteref-3442" epub:type="noteref">3442</a>⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This maiden on a day went in the town</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toward a temple, with her mother dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As is of youngë maidens the mannére.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now was there then a justice in that town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That governor was of that regioún:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so befell, this judge his eyen cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon this maid, avising<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3443" id="noteref-3443" epub:type="noteref">3443</a> her full fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As she came forth by where this judgë stood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon his heartë changed and his mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So was he caught with beauty of this maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to himself full privily he said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“This maiden shall be mine for any man.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon the fiend into his heartë ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And taught him suddenly, that he by sleight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This maiden to his purpose winnë might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For certes, by no force, nor by no meed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3444" id="noteref-3444" epub:type="noteref">3444</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him thought he was not able for to speed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she was strong of friendës, and eke she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confirmed was in such sov’reign bounté,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That well he wist he might her never win,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As for to make her with her body sin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which, with great deliberatioún,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sent after a clerk<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3445" id="noteref-3445" epub:type="noteref">3445</a> was in the town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which he knew for subtle and for bold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This judge unto this clerk his talë told</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In secret wise, and made him to assure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shouldë tell it to no creatúre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if he did, he shouldë lose his head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when assented was this cursed rede,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3446" id="noteref-3446" epub:type="noteref">3446</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glad was the judge, and made him greatë cheer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gave him giftës precioús and dear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When shapen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3447" id="noteref-3447" epub:type="noteref">3447</a> was all their conspiracy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From point to point, how that his lechery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Performed shouldë be full subtilly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ye shall hear it after openly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Home went this clerk, that hightë Claudius.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This falsë judge, that hightë Appius⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(So was his namë, for it is no fable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But knowen for a storial<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3448" id="noteref-3448" epub:type="noteref">3448</a> thing notáble;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sentence<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3449" id="noteref-3449" epub:type="noteref">3449</a> of it sooth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3450" id="noteref-3450" epub:type="noteref">3450</a> is out of doubt);⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This falsë judgë went now fast about</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hasten his delight all that he may.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so befell, soon after on a day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This falsë judge, as telleth us the story,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he was wont, sat in his consistóry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gave his doomes<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3451" id="noteref-3451" epub:type="noteref">3451</a> upon sundry case’;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This falsë clerk came forth a full great pace,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3452" id="noteref-3452" epub:type="noteref">3452</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saidë; “Lord, if that it be your will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As do me right upon this piteous bill,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3453" id="noteref-3453" epub:type="noteref">3453</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which I plain upon Virginius.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if that he will say it is not thus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will it prove, and findë good witnéss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That sooth is what my billë will express.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The judge answér’d, “Of this, in his absénce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I may not give definitive senténce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let do<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3454" id="noteref-3454" epub:type="noteref">3454</a> him call, and I will gladly hear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt have allë right, and no wrong here.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Virginius came to weet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3455" id="noteref-3455" epub:type="noteref">3455</a> the judgë’s will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And right anon was read this cursed bill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sentence of it was as ye shall hear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“To you, my lord, Sir Appius so clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sheweth your poorë servant Claudius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How that a knight callëd Virginius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the law, against all equity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Holdeth, express against the will of me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My servant, which that is my thrall<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3456" id="noteref-3456" epub:type="noteref">3456</a> by right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which from my house was stolen on a night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While that she was full young; I will it preve<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3457" id="noteref-3457" epub:type="noteref">3457</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>By witness, lord, so that it you not grieve;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3458" id="noteref-3458" epub:type="noteref">3458</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>She is his daughter not, what so he say.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore to you, my lord the judge, I pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yield me my thrall, if that it be your will.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, this was all the sentence of the bill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Virginius gan upon the clerk behold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But hastily, ere he his talë told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And would have proved it, as should a knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke by witnessing of many a wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all was false that said his adversary,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This cursed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3459" id="noteref-3459" epub:type="noteref">3459</a> judgë would no longer tarry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor hear a word more of Virginius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But gave his judgëment, and saidë thus:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I deem<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3460" id="noteref-3460" epub:type="noteref">3460</a> anon this clerk his servant have;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt no longer in thy house her save.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go, bring her forth, and put her in our ward;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The clerk shall have his thrall: thus I award.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And when this worthy knight, Virginius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through sentence of this justice Appius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mustë by force his dearë daughter give</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the judge, in lechery to live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He went him home, and sat him in his hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let anon his dearë daughter call;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with a facë dead as ashes cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon her humble face he gan behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With father’s pity sticking<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3461" id="noteref-3461" epub:type="noteref">3461</a> through his heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3462" id="noteref-3462" epub:type="noteref">3462</a> would he from his purpose not convert.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3463" id="noteref-3463" epub:type="noteref">3463</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Daughter,” quoth he, “Virginia by name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There be two wayës, either death or shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou must suffer⁠—alas that I was bore!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For never thou deservedest wherefore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dien with a sword or with a knife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O dearë daughter, ender of my life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom I have foster’d up with such pleasánce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou were ne’er out of my remembrance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O daughter, which that art my lastë woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in this life my lastë joy also,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O gem of chastity, in patiénce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take thou thy death, for this is my senténce:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For love and not for hate thou must be dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My piteous hand must smiten off thine head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas, that ever Appius thee say!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3464" id="noteref-3464" epub:type="noteref">3464</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus hath he falsely judged thee to-day.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And told her all the case, as ye before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have heard; it needeth not to tell it more.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O mercy, dearë father,” quoth the maid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with that word she both her armës laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About his neck, as she was wont to do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(The tearës burst out of her eyen two),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said, “O goodë father, shall I die?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is there no grace? is there no remedý?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“No, certes, dearë daughter mine,” quoth he.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Then give me leisure, father mine,” quoth she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My death for to complain<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3465" id="noteref-3465" epub:type="noteref">3465</a> a little space:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, pardie, Jephthah gave his daughter grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For to complain, ere he her slew, alas!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3466" id="noteref-3466" epub:type="noteref">3466</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, God it wot, nothing was her trespáss,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3467" id="noteref-3467" epub:type="noteref">3467</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for she ran her father first to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To welcome him with great solemnity.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with that word she fell a-swoon anon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after, when her swooning was y-gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She rose up, and unto her father said:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Blessed be God, that I shall die a maid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give me my death, ere that I havë shame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do with your child your will, in Goddë’s name.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with that word she prayed him full oft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That with his sword he wouldë smite her soft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with that word, a-swoon again she fell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her father, with full sorrowful heart and fell,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3468" id="noteref-3468" epub:type="noteref">3468</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her head off smote, and by the top it hent,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3469" id="noteref-3469" epub:type="noteref">3469</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the judge he went it to present,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he sat yet in doom<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3470" id="noteref-3470" epub:type="noteref">3470</a> in consistóry.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And when the judge it saw, as saith the story,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He bade to take him, and to hang him fast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But right anon a thousand people in thrast<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3471" id="noteref-3471" epub:type="noteref">3471</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To save the knight, for ruth and for pitý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For knowen was the false iniquity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The people anon had súspect<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3472" id="noteref-3472" epub:type="noteref">3472</a> in this thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By manner of the clerkë’s challengíng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it was by th’ assent of Appius;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They wistë well that he was lecherous.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which unto this Appius they gon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cast him in a prison right anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where as he slew himself: and Claudius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That servant was unto this Appius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was doomed for to hang upon a tree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that Virginius, of his pitý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So prayed for him, that he was exil’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ellës certes had he been beguil’d;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3473" id="noteref-3473" epub:type="noteref">3473</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The remenant were hanged, more and less,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That were consenting to this cursedness.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3474" id="noteref-3474" epub:type="noteref">3474</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Here men may see how sin hath his meríte:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3475" id="noteref-3475" epub:type="noteref">3475</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beware, for no man knows how God will smite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In no degree, nor in which manner wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The worm of consciéncë may agrise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3476" id="noteref-3476" epub:type="noteref">3476</a> wicked life, though it so privy be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That no man knows thereof, save God and he;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For be he lewëd man or ellës lear’d,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3477" id="noteref-3477" epub:type="noteref">3477</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He knows not how soon he shall be afear’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore I redë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3478" id="noteref-3478" epub:type="noteref">3478</a> you this counsel take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forsakë sin, ere sinnë you forsake.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
