<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Clerk’s Tale</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-clerks-tale" epub:type="division z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Clerk’s Tale</h2>
			<section id="the-clerks-tale-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Prologue</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Sir Clerk of Oxenford,” our Hostë said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ye ride as still and coy, as doth a maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That were new spoused, sitting at the board:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This day I heard not of your tongue a word.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I trow ye study about some sophime:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2423" id="noteref-2423" epub:type="noteref">2423</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Solomon saith, every thing hath time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Goddë’s sake, be of better cheer,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2424" id="noteref-2424" epub:type="noteref">2424</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is no timë for to study here.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell us some merry talë, by your fay;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2425" id="noteref-2425" epub:type="noteref">2425</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For what man that is entered in a play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He needës must unto that play assent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But preachë not, as friars do in Lent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make us for our oldë sinnës weep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor that thy talë make us not to sleep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell us some merry thing of áventures.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your terms, your colourës, and your figúres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keep them in store, till so be ye indite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High style, as when that men to kingës write.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speakë so plain at this time, I you pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That we may understandë what ye say.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This worthy Clerk benignëly answér’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Hostë,” quoth he, “I am under your yerd,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2426" id="noteref-2426" epub:type="noteref">2426</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye have of us as now the governánce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore would I do you obeisánce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As far as reason asketh, hardily:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2427" id="noteref-2427" epub:type="noteref">2427</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will you tell a talë, which that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Learn’d at Padova of a worthy clerk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As proved by his wordës and his werk.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is now dead, and nailed in his chest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray to God to give his soul good rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Francis Petrarc’, the laureate poét,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2428" id="noteref-2428" epub:type="noteref">2428</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hightë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2429" id="noteref-2429" epub:type="noteref">2429</a> this clerk, whose rhetoric so sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Illumin’d all Itále of poetry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Linian<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2430" id="noteref-2430" epub:type="noteref">2430</a> did of philosophy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or law, or other art particulére:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But death, that will not suffer us dwell here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as it were a twinkling of an eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Them both hath slain, and allë we shall die.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But forth to tellen of this worthy man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That taughtë me this tale, as I began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say that first he with high style inditeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Ere he the body of his talë writeth)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A proem, in the which describeth he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Piedmont, and of Saluces<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2431" id="noteref-2431" epub:type="noteref">2431</a> the countrý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And speaketh of the Pennine hillës high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That be the bounds of all West Lombardy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of Mount Vesulus in special,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where as the Po out of a wellë small</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Taketh his firstë springing and his source,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That eastward aye increaseth in his course</span>
					<br/>
					<span>T’ Emilia-ward,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2432" id="noteref-2432" epub:type="noteref">2432</a> to Ferraro, and Veníce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which a long thing werë to devise.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2433" id="noteref-2433" epub:type="noteref">2433</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And truëly, as to my judgëment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me thinketh it a thing impertinent,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2434" id="noteref-2434" epub:type="noteref">2434</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save that he would conveyë his mattére:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But this is the tale, which that ye shall hear.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-clerks-tale-body" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Tale<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2435" id="noteref-2435" epub:type="noteref">2435</a></h3>
				<section id="the-clerks-tale-body-1" epub:type="part">
					<h4 xml:lang="la">
						<span epub:type="label">Pars</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal">Prima</span>
					</h4>
					<p>
						<span>There is, right at the west side of Itále,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Down at the root of Vesulus<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2436" id="noteref-2436" epub:type="noteref">2436</a> the cold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A lusty<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2437" id="noteref-2437" epub:type="noteref">2437</a> plain, abundant of vitáille;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There many a town and tow’r thou may’st behold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That founded were in time of fathers old,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And many another délectáble sight;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Saluces this noble country hight.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>A marquis whilom lord was of that land,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As were his worthy elders<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2438" id="noteref-2438" epub:type="noteref">2438</a> him before,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And obedient, aye ready to his hand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Were all his lieges, bothë less and more:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thus in delight he liv’d, and had done yore,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2439" id="noteref-2439" epub:type="noteref">2439</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Belov’d and drad,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2440" id="noteref-2440" epub:type="noteref">2440</a> through favour of fortúne,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both of his lordës and of his commúne.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2441" id="noteref-2441" epub:type="noteref">2441</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Therewith he was, to speak of lineage,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The gentilest y-born of Lombardy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A fair persón, and strong, and young of age,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And full of honour and of courtesy:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Discreet enough his country for to gie,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2442" id="noteref-2442" epub:type="noteref">2442</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Saving in some things that he was to blame;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Walter was this youngë lordë’s name.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>I blame him thus, that he consider’d not</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In timë coming what might him betide,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But on his present lust<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2443" id="noteref-2443" epub:type="noteref">2443</a> was all his thought,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And for to hawk and hunt on every side;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Well nigh all other carës let he slide,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And eke he would (that was the worst of all)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Weddë no wife for aught that might befall.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Only that point his people bare so sore,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That flockmel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2444" id="noteref-2444" epub:type="noteref">2444</a> on a day to him they went,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And one of them, that wisest was of lore</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(Or ellës that the lord would best assent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That he should tell him what the people meant,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or ellës could he well shew such mattére),</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He to the marquis said as ye shall hear.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“O noble Marquis! your humanity</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Assureth us and gives us hardiness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As oft as time is of necessity,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That we to you may tell our heaviness:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Acceptë, Lord, now of your gentleness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What we with piteous heart unto you plain,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2445" id="noteref-2445" epub:type="noteref">2445</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And let your ears my voicë not disdain.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“All<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2446" id="noteref-2446" epub:type="noteref">2446</a> have I nought to do in this mattére</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More than another man hath in this place,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet forasmuch as ye, my Lord so dear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have always shewed me favour and grace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I dare the better ask of you a space</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of audience, to shewen our request,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And ye, my Lord, to do right as you lest.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2447" id="noteref-2447" epub:type="noteref">2447</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“For certes, Lord, so well us likë you</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all your work, and ev’r have done, that we</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ne couldë not ourselves devisë how</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We mightë live in more felicity:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Save one thing, Lord, if that your will it be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That for to be a wedded man you lest;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then were your people in sovereign heart’s rest.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2448" id="noteref-2448" epub:type="noteref">2448</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Bowë your neck under the blissful yoke</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of sovereignty, and not of servíce,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which that men call espousal or wedlóck:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thinkë, Lord, among your thoughtës wise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How that our dayës pass in sundry wise;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For though we sleep, or wake, or roam, or ride,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Aye fleeth time, it will no man abide.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“And though your greenë youthë flow’r as yet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In creepeth age always as still as stone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And death menaceth every age, and smit<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2449" id="noteref-2449" epub:type="noteref">2449</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>In each estate, for there escapeth none:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all so certain as we know each one</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That we shall die, as uncertáin we all</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be of that day when death shall on us fall.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Acceptë then of us the true intent,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2450" id="noteref-2450" epub:type="noteref">2450</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>That never yet refused yourë hest,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2451" id="noteref-2451" epub:type="noteref">2451</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And we will, Lord, if that ye will assent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Choose you a wife, in short time at the lest,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2452" id="noteref-2452" epub:type="noteref">2452</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Born of the gentilest and of the best</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of all this land, so that it ought to seem</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Honour to God and you, as we can deem.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Deliver us out of all this busy dread,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2453" id="noteref-2453" epub:type="noteref">2453</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And take a wife, for highë Goddë’s sake:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For if it so befell, as God forbid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That through your death your lineage should slake,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2454" id="noteref-2454" epub:type="noteref">2454</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And that a strange successor shouldë take</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your heritage, oh! woe were us on live:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2455" id="noteref-2455" epub:type="noteref">2455</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wherefore we pray you hastily to wive.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Their meekë prayer and their piteous cheer</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made the marquis for to have pitý.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Ye will,” quoth he, “mine owen people dear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To that I ne’er ere<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2456" id="noteref-2456" epub:type="noteref">2456</a> thought constrainë me.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I me rejoiced of my liberty,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That seldom time is found in marriáge;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where I was free, I must be in serváge!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2457" id="noteref-2457" epub:type="noteref">2457</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“But natheless I see your true intent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And trust upon your wit, and have done aye:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wherefore of my free will I will assent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To weddë me, as soon as e’er I may.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But whereas ye have proffer’d me to-day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To choosë me a wife, I you release</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That choice, and pray you of that proffer cease.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“For God it wot, that children often been</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unlike their worthy elders them before,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bounté<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2458" id="noteref-2458" epub:type="noteref">2458</a> comes all of God, not of the strene<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2459" id="noteref-2459" epub:type="noteref">2459</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of which they be engender’d and y-bore:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I trust in Goddë’s bounté, and therefore</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My marriage, and mine estate and rest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I him betake;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2460" id="noteref-2460" epub:type="noteref">2460</a> he may do as him lest.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Let me alone in choosing of my wife;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That charge upon my back I will endure:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But I you pray, and charge upon your life,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That what wife that I take, ye me assure</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To worship<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2461" id="noteref-2461" epub:type="noteref">2461</a> her, while that her life may dure,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In word and work both here and ellëswhere,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As she an emperorë’s daughter were.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“And farthermore this shall ye swear, that ye</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Against my choice shall never grudge<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2462" id="noteref-2462" epub:type="noteref">2462</a> nor strive.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For since I shall forego my liberty</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At your request, as ever may I thrive,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where as mine heart is set, there will I wive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And but<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2463" id="noteref-2463" epub:type="noteref">2463</a> ye will assent in such mannére,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I pray you speak no more of this mattére.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>With heartly will they sworen and assent’</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To all this thing, there said not one wight nay:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beseeching him of grace, ere that they went,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That he would grantë them a certain day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of his espousal, soon as e’er he may,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For yet always the people somewhat dread<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2464" id="noteref-2464" epub:type="noteref">2464</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lest that the marquis wouldë no wife wed.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He granted them a day, such as him lest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On which he would be wedded sickerly,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2465" id="noteref-2465" epub:type="noteref">2465</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And said he did all this at their request;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And they with humble heart full buxomly,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2466" id="noteref-2466" epub:type="noteref">2466</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Kneeling upon their knees full reverently,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Him thanked all; and thus they have an end</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of their intent, and home again they wend.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And hereupon he to his officers</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Commanded for the feastë to purvey.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2467" id="noteref-2467" epub:type="noteref">2467</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to his privy knightës and squiérs</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such charge he gave, as him list on them lay:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And they to his commandëment obey,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And each of them doth all his diligence</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To do unto the feast all reverence.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-clerks-tale-body-2" epub:type="part">
					<h4 xml:lang="la">
						<span epub:type="label">Pars</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal">Secunda</span>
					</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Not far from thilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2468" id="noteref-2468" epub:type="noteref">2468</a> palace honouráble,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where as this marquis shope<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2469" id="noteref-2469" epub:type="noteref">2469</a> his marriáge,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There stood a thorp,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2470" id="noteref-2470" epub:type="noteref">2470</a> of sightë délectáble,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In which the poorë folk of that villáge</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Haddë their beastës and their harbourage,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2471" id="noteref-2471" epub:type="noteref">2471</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And of their labour took their sustenance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>After the earthë gave them ábundánce.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Among this poorë folk there dwelt a man</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which that was holden poorest of them all;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But highë God sometimës sendë can</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His grace unto a little ox’s stall;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Janicola men of that thorp him call.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A daughter had he, fair enough to sight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Griseldis this youngë maiden hight.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>But for to speak of virtuous beauty,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then was she one the fairest under sun:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Full poorëly y-foster’d up was she;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No likerous lust<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2472" id="noteref-2472" epub:type="noteref">2472</a> was in her heart y-run;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Well ofter of the well than of the tun<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2473" id="noteref-2473" epub:type="noteref">2473</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>She drank, and, for<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2474" id="noteref-2474" epub:type="noteref">2474</a> she wouldë virtue please,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She knew well labour, but no idle ease.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>But though this maiden tender were of age;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet in the breast of her virginity</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There was inclos’d a sad and ripe coráge;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2475" id="noteref-2475" epub:type="noteref">2475</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in great reverence and charity</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her oldë poorë father foster’d she.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A few sheep, spinning, on the field she kept,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She wouldë not be idle till she slept.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And when she homeward camë, she would bring</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wortës,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2476" id="noteref-2476" epub:type="noteref">2476</a> and other herbës, timës oft,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The which she shred and seeth’d for her livíng,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And made her bed full hard, and nothing soft:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And aye she kept her father’s life on loft<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2477" id="noteref-2477" epub:type="noteref">2477</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>With ev’ry obeisánce and diligence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That child may do to father’s reverence.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Upon Griselda, this poor creatúre,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Full often sithes<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2478" id="noteref-2478" epub:type="noteref">2478</a> this marquis set his eye,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As he on hunting rode, paráventure:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2479" id="noteref-2479" epub:type="noteref">2479</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when it fell that he might her espy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He not with wanton looking of follý</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His eyen cast on her, but in sad<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2480" id="noteref-2480" epub:type="noteref">2480</a> wise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon her cheer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2481" id="noteref-2481" epub:type="noteref">2481</a> he would him oft advise;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2482" id="noteref-2482" epub:type="noteref">2482</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Commending in his heart her womanhead,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And eke her virtue, passing any wight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of so young age, as well in cheer as deed.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For though the people have no great insight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In virtue, he considered full right</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her bounté,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2483" id="noteref-2483" epub:type="noteref">2483</a> and disposed that he would</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wed only her, if ever wed he should.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The day of wedding came, but no wight can</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tellë what woman that it shouldë be;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For which marvail wonder’d many a man,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And saidë, when they were in privity,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Will not our lord yet leave his vanity?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will he not wed? Alas, alas the while!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Why will he thus himself and us beguile?”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>But natheless this marquis had done<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2484" id="noteref-2484" epub:type="noteref">2484</a> make</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of gemmës, set in gold and in azúre,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Brooches and ringës, for Griselda’s sake,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And of her clothing took he the measúre</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of a maiden like unto her statúre,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And eke of other ornamentës all</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That unto such a wedding shouldë fall.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2485" id="noteref-2485" epub:type="noteref">2485</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The time of undern<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2486" id="noteref-2486" epub:type="noteref">2486</a> of the samë day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Approached, that this wedding shouldë be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all the palace put was in array,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both hall and chamber, each in its degree,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Houses of office stuffed with plenty</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There may’st thou see of dainteous vitáille,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That may be found, as far as lasts Itále.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>This royal marquis, richëly array’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lordës and ladies in his company,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The which unto the feastë werë pray’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And of his retinue the bach’lerý,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With many a sound of sundry melody,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unto the village, of the which I told,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In this array the right way did they hold.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Griseld’ of this (God wot) full innocent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That for her shapen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2487" id="noteref-2487" epub:type="noteref">2487</a> was all this array,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To fetchë water at a well is went,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And home she came as soon as e’er she may.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For well she had heard say, that on that day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The marquis shouldë wed, and, if she might,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She fain would have seen somewhat of that sight.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>She thought, “I will with other maidens stand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That be my fellows, in our door, and see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The marchioness; and therefore will I fand<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2488" id="noteref-2488" epub:type="noteref">2488</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>To do at home, as soon as it may be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The labour which belongeth unto me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And then I may at leisure her behold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If she this way unto the castle hold.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And as she would over the threshold gon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The marquis came and gan for her to call,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And she set down her water-pot anon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beside the threshold, in an ox’s stall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And down upon her knees she gan to fall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with sad<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2489" id="noteref-2489" epub:type="noteref">2489</a> countenancë kneeled still,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till she had heard what was the lordë’s will.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The thoughtful marquis spake unto the maid</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Full soberly, and said in this mannére:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Where is your father, Griseldis?” he said.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And she with reverence, in humble cheer,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2490" id="noteref-2490" epub:type="noteref">2490</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Answered, “Lord, he is all ready here.”</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in she went withoutë longer let,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2491" id="noteref-2491" epub:type="noteref">2491</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to the marquis she her father fet.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2492" id="noteref-2492" epub:type="noteref">2492</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He by the hand then took the poorë man,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And saidë thus, when he him had aside:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Janicola, I neither may nor can</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Longer the pleasance of mine heartë hide;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If that thou vouchësafe, whatso betide,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy daughter will I take, ere that I wend,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2493" id="noteref-2493" epub:type="noteref">2493</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>As for my wife, unto her lifë’s end.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Thou lovest me, that know I well certáin,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And art my faithful liegëman y-bore,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2494" id="noteref-2494" epub:type="noteref">2494</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all that liketh me, I dare well sayn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It liketh thee; and specially therefore</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Tell me that point, that I have said before⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If that thou wilt unto this purpose draw,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To takë me as for thy son-in-law.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>This sudden case<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2495" id="noteref-2495" epub:type="noteref">2495</a> the man astonied so,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That red he wax’d, abash’d,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2496" id="noteref-2496" epub:type="noteref">2496</a> and all quaking</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He stood; unnethës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2497" id="noteref-2497" epub:type="noteref">2497</a> said he wordës mo’,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But only thus; “Lord,” quoth he, “my willing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is as ye will, nor against your liking</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I will no thing, mine owen lord so dear;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Right as you list governë this mattére.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Then will I,” quoth the marquis softëly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“That in thy chamber I, and thou, and she,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have a collatión;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2498" id="noteref-2498" epub:type="noteref">2498</a> and know’st thou why?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For I will ask her, if her will it be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be my wife, and rule her after me:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all this shall be done in thy presénce,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I will not speak out of thine audience.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2499" id="noteref-2499" epub:type="noteref">2499</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And in the chamber while they were about</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The treaty, which ye shall hereafter hear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The people came into the house without,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And wonder’d them in how honést mannére</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And tenderly she kept her father dear;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But utterly Griseldis wonder might,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For never erst<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2500" id="noteref-2500" epub:type="noteref">2500</a> ne saw she such a sight.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>No wonder is though that she be astoned,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2501" id="noteref-2501" epub:type="noteref">2501</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>To see so great a guest come in that place,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She never was to no such guestës woned;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2502" id="noteref-2502" epub:type="noteref">2502</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>For which she looked with full palë face.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But shortly forth this matter for to chase,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2503" id="noteref-2503" epub:type="noteref">2503</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>These are the wordës that the marquis said</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To this benignë, very,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2504" id="noteref-2504" epub:type="noteref">2504</a> faithful maid.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Griseld’,” he said, “ye shall well understand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It liketh to your father and to me</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I you wed, and eke it may so stand,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As I suppose ye will that it so be:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But these demandës ask I first,” quoth he,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Since that it shall be done in hasty wise;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will ye assent, or ellës you advise?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2505" id="noteref-2505" epub:type="noteref">2505</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“I say this, be ye ready with good heart</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To all my lust,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2506" id="noteref-2506" epub:type="noteref">2506</a> and that I freely may,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As me best thinketh, do<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2507" id="noteref-2507" epub:type="noteref">2507</a> you laugh or smart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And never ye to grudgë,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2508" id="noteref-2508" epub:type="noteref">2508</a> night nor day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And eke when I say Yea, ye say not Nay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Neither by word, nor frowning countenance?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Swear this, and here I swear our álliance.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Wond’ring upon this word, quaking for dread,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She saidë; “Lord, indigne and unworthy</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Am I to this honoúr that ye me bede,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2509" id="noteref-2509" epub:type="noteref">2509</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>But as ye will yourself, right so will I:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And here I swear, that never willingly</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In word or thought I will you disobey,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For to be dead; though me were loth to dey.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2510" id="noteref-2510" epub:type="noteref">2510</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“This is enough, Griselda mine,” quoth he.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And forth he went with a full sober cheer,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Out at the door, and after then came she,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to the people he said in this mannére:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“This is my wife,” quoth he, “that standeth here.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Honoúrë her, and love her, I you pray,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whoso me loves; there is no more to say.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And, for that nothing of her oldë gear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She shouldë bring into his house, he bade</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That women should despoilë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2511" id="noteref-2511" epub:type="noteref">2511</a> her right there;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of which these ladies werë nothing glad</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To handle her clothës wherein she was clad:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But natheless this maiden bright of hue</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From foot to head they clothed have all new.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Her hairës have they comb’d that lay untress’d<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2512" id="noteref-2512" epub:type="noteref">2512</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Full rudëly, and with their fingers small</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A crown upon her head they havë dress’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And set her full of nouches<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2513" id="noteref-2513" epub:type="noteref">2513</a> great and small:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of her array why should I make a tale?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unneth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2514" id="noteref-2514" epub:type="noteref">2514</a> the people her knew for her fairnéss,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When she transmuted was in such richéss.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The marquis hath her spoused with a ring</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Brought for the samë cause, and then her set</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon a horse snow-white, and well ambling,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to his palace, ere he longer let<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2515" id="noteref-2515" epub:type="noteref">2515</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>With joyful people, that her led and met,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Conveyed her; and thus the day they spend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In revel, till the sunnë gan descend.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And, shortly forth this talë for to chase,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I say, that to this newë marchioness</span>
						<br/>
						<span>God hath such favour sent her of his grace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That it ne seemed not by likeliness</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That she was born and fed in rudëness⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As in a cot, or in an ox’s stall⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But nourish’d in an emperorë’s hall.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To every wight she waxen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2516" id="noteref-2516" epub:type="noteref">2516</a> is so dear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And worshipful, that folk where she was born,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That from her birthë knew her year by year,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unnethës trowed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2517" id="noteref-2517" epub:type="noteref">2517</a> they, but durst have sworn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That to Janicol’ of whom I spake before,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She was not daughter, for by conjectúre</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Them thought she was another creatúre.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>For though that ever virtuous was she,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She was increased in such excellence</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of thewës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2518" id="noteref-2518" epub:type="noteref">2518</a> good, y-set in high bounté,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And so discreet, and fair of eloquence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So benign, and so digne<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2519" id="noteref-2519" epub:type="noteref">2519</a> of reverence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And couldë so the people’s heart embrace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That each her lov’d that looked on her face.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Not only of Saluces in the town</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Published was the bounté of her name,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But eke besides in many a regioún;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If one said well, another said the same:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So spread of herë high bounté the fame,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That men and women, young as well as old,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Went to Saluces, her for to behold.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Thus Walter lowly⁠—nay, but royally⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wedded with fortunate honesteté,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2520" id="noteref-2520" epub:type="noteref">2520</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>In Goddë’s peace lived full easily</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At home, and outward grace enough had he:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, for he saw that under low degree</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was honest virtue hid, the people him held</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A prudent man, and that is seen full seld’.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2521" id="noteref-2521" epub:type="noteref">2521</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Not only this Griseldis through her wit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Couth all the feat<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2522" id="noteref-2522" epub:type="noteref">2522</a> of wifely homeliness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But eke, when that the case required it,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The common profit couldë she redress:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2523" id="noteref-2523" epub:type="noteref">2523</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>There n’as discord, rancoúr, nor heaviness</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In all the land, that she could not appease,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And wisely bring them all in rest and ease.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Though that her husband absent were or non,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2524" id="noteref-2524" epub:type="noteref">2524</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>If gentlemen or other of that country,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Were wroth,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2525" id="noteref-2525" epub:type="noteref">2525</a> she wouldë bringë them at one,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So wise and ripë wordës haddë she,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And judgëment of so great equity,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That she from heaven sent was, as men wend,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2526" id="noteref-2526" epub:type="noteref">2526</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>People to save, and every wrong t’amend</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Not longë time after that this Griseld’</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was wedded, she a daughter had y-bore;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All she had lever<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2527" id="noteref-2527" epub:type="noteref">2527</a> borne a knavë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2528" id="noteref-2528" epub:type="noteref">2528</a> child,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Glad was the marquis and his folk therefore;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For, though a maiden child came all before,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She may unto a knavë child attain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By likelihood, since she is not barrén.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-clerks-tale-body-3" epub:type="part">
					<h4 xml:lang="la">
						<span epub:type="label">Pars</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal">Tertia</span>
					</h4>
					<p>
						<span>There fell, as falleth many timës mo’,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When that his child had sucked but a throw,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2529" id="noteref-2529" epub:type="noteref">2529</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>This marquis in his heartë longed so</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To tempt his wife, her sadness<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2530" id="noteref-2530" epub:type="noteref">2530</a> for to know,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That he might not out of his heartë throw</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This marvellous desire his wife t’assay;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2531" id="noteref-2531" epub:type="noteref">2531</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Needless,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2532" id="noteref-2532" epub:type="noteref">2532</a> God wot, he thought her to affray.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2533" id="noteref-2533" epub:type="noteref">2533</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He had assayed her anough before,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And found her ever good; what needed it</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her for to tempt, and always more and more?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though some men praise it for a subtle wit,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But as for me, I say that evil it sit<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2534" id="noteref-2534" epub:type="noteref">2534</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>T’ assay a wife when that it is no need,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And puttë her in anguish and in dread.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>For which this marquis wrought in this mannére:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He came at night alone there as she lay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With sternë face and with full troubled cheer,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And saidë thus; “Griseld’,” quoth he “that day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I you took out of your poor array,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And put you in estate of high nobléss,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ye have it not forgotten, as I guess.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“I say, Griseld’, this present dignity,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In which that I have put you, as I trow<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2535" id="noteref-2535" epub:type="noteref">2535</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Maketh you not forgetful for to be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I you took in poor estate full low,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For any weal you must yourselfë know.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Take heed of every word that I you say,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There is no wight that hears it but we tway.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2536" id="noteref-2536" epub:type="noteref">2536</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Ye know yourself well how that ye came here</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into this house, it is not long ago;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And though to me ye be right lefe<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2537" id="noteref-2537" epub:type="noteref">2537</a> and dear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unto my gentles<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2538" id="noteref-2538" epub:type="noteref">2538</a> ye be nothing so:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They say, to them it is great shame and woe</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For to be subject, and be in serváge,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To thee, that born art of small lineage.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“And namely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2539" id="noteref-2539" epub:type="noteref">2539</a> since thy daughter was y-bore</span>
						<br/>
						<span>These wordës have they spoken doubtëless;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But I desire, as I have done before,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To live my life with them in rest and peace:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I may not in this case be reckëless;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I must do with thy daughter for the best,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not as I would, but as my gentles lest.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2540" id="noteref-2540" epub:type="noteref">2540</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“And yet, God wot, this is full loth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2541" id="noteref-2541" epub:type="noteref">2541</a> to me:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But natheless withoutë your weeting<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2542" id="noteref-2542" epub:type="noteref">2542</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>I will nought do; but this will I,” quoth he,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“That ye to me assenten in this thing.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shew now your patience in your working,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That ye me hight<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2543" id="noteref-2543" epub:type="noteref">2543</a> and swore in your villáge</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The day that maked was our marriáge.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>When she had heard all this, she not amev’d<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2544" id="noteref-2544" epub:type="noteref">2544</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Neither in word, in cheer, nor countenance</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(For, as it seemed, she was not aggriev’d);</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She saidë; “Lord, all lies in your pleasánce,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My child and I, with hearty obeisánce</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be yourës all, and ye may save or spill<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2545" id="noteref-2545" epub:type="noteref">2545</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your owen thing: work then after your will.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“There may no thing, so God my soulë save,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Likë to<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2546" id="noteref-2546" epub:type="noteref">2546</a> you, that may displeasë me:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor I desire nothing for to have,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor dreadë for to lose, save only ye:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This will is in mine heart, and aye shall be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No length of time, nor death, may this deface,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor change my corage<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2547" id="noteref-2547" epub:type="noteref">2547</a> to another place.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Glad was the marquis for her answering,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But yet he feigned as he were not so;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All dreary was his cheer and his looking</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When that he should out of the chamber go.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Soon after this, a furlong way or two,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2548" id="noteref-2548" epub:type="noteref">2548</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>He privily hath told all his intent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unto a man, and to his wife him sent.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>A manner sergeant<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2549" id="noteref-2549" epub:type="noteref">2549</a> was this private man,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2550" id="noteref-2550" epub:type="noteref">2550</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>The which he faithful often founden had</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In thingës great, and eke such folk well can</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Do executión in thingës bad:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The lord knew well, that he him loved and drad.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2551" id="noteref-2551" epub:type="noteref">2551</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when this sergeant knew his lordë’s will,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Into the chamber stalked he full still.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Madam,” he said, “ye must forgive it me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though I do thing to which I am constrain’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ye be so wise, that right well knowë ye</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That lordës’ hestës may not be y-feign’d;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2552" id="noteref-2552" epub:type="noteref">2552</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>They may well be bewailed and complain’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But men must needs unto their lust<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2553" id="noteref-2553" epub:type="noteref">2553</a> obey;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And so will I, there is no more to say.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“This child I am commanded for to take.”</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And spake no more, but out the child he hent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2554" id="noteref-2554" epub:type="noteref">2554</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dispiteously,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2555" id="noteref-2555" epub:type="noteref">2555</a> and gan a cheer to make<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2556" id="noteref-2556" epub:type="noteref">2556</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>As though he would have slain it ere he went.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Griseldis must all suffer and consent:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And as a lamb she sat there meek and still,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And let this cruel sergeant do his will.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Suspicious<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2557" id="noteref-2557" epub:type="noteref">2557</a> was the diffame<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2558" id="noteref-2558" epub:type="noteref">2558</a> of this man,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Suspect his face, suspect his word also,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Suspect the time in which he this began:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Alas! her daughter, that she loved so,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She weened<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2559" id="noteref-2559" epub:type="noteref">2559</a> he would have it slain right tho,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2560" id="noteref-2560" epub:type="noteref">2560</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>But natheless she neither wept nor siked,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2561" id="noteref-2561" epub:type="noteref">2561</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Conforming her to what the marquis liked.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>But at the last to speakë she began,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And meekly she unto the sergeant pray’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So as he was a worthy gentle man,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That she might kiss her child, ere that it died:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in her barme<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2562" id="noteref-2562" epub:type="noteref">2562</a> this little child she laid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With full sad face, and gan the child to bless,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2563" id="noteref-2563" epub:type="noteref">2563</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And lulled it, and after gan it kiss.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And thus she said in her benignë voice:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Farewell, my child, I shall thee never see;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But since I have thee marked with the cross,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of that father y-blessed may’st thou be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That for us died upon a cross of tree:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy soul, my little child, I him betake,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2564" id="noteref-2564" epub:type="noteref">2564</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>For this night shalt thou dien for my sake.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>I trow<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2565" id="noteref-2565" epub:type="noteref">2565</a> that to a norice<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2566" id="noteref-2566" epub:type="noteref">2566</a> in this case</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It had been hard this ruthë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2567" id="noteref-2567" epub:type="noteref">2567</a> for to see:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Well might a mother then have cried, “Alas!”</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But natheless so sad steadfást was she,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That she endured all adversity,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to the sergeant meekëly she said,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Have here again your little youngë maid.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Go now,” quoth she, “and do my lord’s behest.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And one thing would I pray you of your grace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But if<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2568" id="noteref-2568" epub:type="noteref">2568</a> my lord forbade you at the least,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bury this little body in some place,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That neither beasts nor birdës it arace.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2569" id="noteref-2569" epub:type="noteref">2569</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>But he no word would to that purpose say,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But took the child and went upon his way.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The sergeant came unto his lord again,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And of Griselda’s words and of her cheer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2570" id="noteref-2570" epub:type="noteref">2570</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>He told him point for point, in short and plain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And him presented with his daughter dear.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Somewhat this lord had ruth in his mannére,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But natheless his purpose held he still,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As lordës do, when they will have their will;</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And bade this sergeant that he privily</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shouldë the child full softly wind and wrap,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With allë circumstances tenderly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And carry it in a coffer, or in lap;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, upon pain his head off for to swap,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2571" id="noteref-2571" epub:type="noteref">2571</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>That no man shouldë know of his intent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor whence he came, nor whither that he went;</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>But at Bologna, to his sister dear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That at that time of Panic’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2572" id="noteref-2572" epub:type="noteref">2572</a> was Countéss,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He should it take, and shew her this mattere,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Beseeching her to do her business</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This child to foster in all gentleness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And whosë child it was he bade her hide</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From every wight, for aught that might betide.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The sergeant went, and hath fulfill’d this thing.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But to the marquis now returnë we;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For now went he full fast imagining</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If by his wifë’s cheer he mightë see,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or by her wordës apperceive, that she</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Were changed; but he never could her find,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But ever-in-one<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2573" id="noteref-2573" epub:type="noteref">2573</a> alikë sad<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2574" id="noteref-2574" epub:type="noteref">2574</a> and kind.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>As glad, as humble, as busy in servíce,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And eke in love, as she was wont to be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was she to him, in every manner wise;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2575" id="noteref-2575" epub:type="noteref">2575</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And of her daughter not a word spake she;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No accident for no adversity<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2576" id="noteref-2576" epub:type="noteref">2576</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was seen in her, nor e’er her daughter’s name</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She named, or in earnest or in game.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-clerks-tale-body-4" epub:type="part">
					<h4 xml:lang="la">
						<span epub:type="label">Pars</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal">Quarta</span>
					</h4>
					<p>
						<span>In this estate there passed be four year</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ere she with childë was; but, as God wo’ld,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A knavë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2577" id="noteref-2577" epub:type="noteref">2577</a> child she bare by this Waltére,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Full gracious and fair for to behold;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when that folk it to his father told,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not only he, but all his country, merry</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Were for this child, and God they thank and hery.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2578" id="noteref-2578" epub:type="noteref">2578</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>When it was two year old, and from the breast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Departed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2579" id="noteref-2579" epub:type="noteref">2579</a> of the norice, on a day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This marquis caughtë yet another lest<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2580" id="noteref-2580" epub:type="noteref">2580</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>To tempt his wife yet farther, if he may.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Oh! needless was she tempted in assay;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2581" id="noteref-2581" epub:type="noteref">2581</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>But wedded men not connen no measúre,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2582" id="noteref-2582" epub:type="noteref">2582</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>When that they find a patient creatúre.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Wife,” quoth the marquis, “ye have heard ere this</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My people sickly bear<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2583" id="noteref-2583" epub:type="noteref">2583</a> our marriáge;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And namely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2584" id="noteref-2584" epub:type="noteref">2584</a> since my son y-boren is,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now is it worse than ever in all our age:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The murmur slays mine heart and my coráge,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For to mine ears cometh the voice so smart,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2585" id="noteref-2585" epub:type="noteref">2585</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>That it well nigh destroyed hath mine heart.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Now say they thus, ‘When Walter is y-gone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then shall the blood of Janicol’ succeed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And be our lord, for other have we none:’</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such wordës say my people, out of drede.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2586" id="noteref-2586" epub:type="noteref">2586</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Well ought I of such murmur takë heed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For certainly I dread all such senténce,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2587" id="noteref-2587" epub:type="noteref">2587</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though they not plainen in mine audiénce.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2588" id="noteref-2588" epub:type="noteref">2588</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“I wouldë live in peace, if that I might;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wherefore I am disposed utterly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As I his sister served ere<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2589" id="noteref-2589" epub:type="noteref">2589</a> by night,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Right so think I to serve him privily.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This warn I you, that ye not suddenly</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Out of yourself for no woe should outraie;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2590" id="noteref-2590" epub:type="noteref">2590</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be patient, and thereof I you pray.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“I have,” quoth she, “said thus, and ever shall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I will no thing, nor n’ill no thing, certáin,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But as you list; not grieveth me at all</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though that my daughter and my son be slain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At your commandëment; that is to sayn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I have not had no part of children twain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But first sicknéss, and after woe and pain.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Ye be my lord, do with your owen thing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Right as you list, and ask no rede<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2591" id="noteref-2591" epub:type="noteref">2591</a> of me:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For, as I left at home all my clothing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When I came first to you, right so,” quoth she,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Left I my will and all my liberty,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And took your clothing: wherefore I you pray,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Do your pleasánce, I will your lust<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2592" id="noteref-2592" epub:type="noteref">2592</a> obey.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“And, certes, if I haddë prescience</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your will to know, ere ye your lust<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2593" id="noteref-2593" epub:type="noteref">2593</a> me told,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I would it do withoutë negligence:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, now I know your lust, and what ye wo’ld,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All your pleasancë firm and stable I hold;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For, wist I that my death might do you ease,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Right gladly would I dien you to please.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Death may not makë no comparisoún</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unto your love.” And when this marquis say<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2594" id="noteref-2594" epub:type="noteref">2594</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>The constance of his wife, he cast adown</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His eyen two, and wonder’d how she may</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In patience suffer all this array;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And forth he went with dreary countenance;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But to his heart it was full great pleasánce.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>This ugly sergeant, in the samë wise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That he her daughter caught, right so hath he</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(Or worse, if men can any worse devise,)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Y-hent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2595" id="noteref-2595" epub:type="noteref">2595</a> her son, that full was of beauty:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And ever-in-one<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2596" id="noteref-2596" epub:type="noteref">2596</a> so patient was she,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That she no cheerë made of heaviness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But kiss’d her son, and after gan him bless.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Save this she prayed him, if that he might,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her little son he would in earthë grave,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2597" id="noteref-2597" epub:type="noteref">2597</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>His tender limbës, delicate to sight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From fowlës and from beastës for to save.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But she none answer of him mightë have;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He went his way, as him nothing ne raught,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2598" id="noteref-2598" epub:type="noteref">2598</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>But to Bologna tenderly it brought.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The marquis wonder’d ever longer more</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon her patience; and, if that he</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not haddë soothly knowen therebefore</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That perfectly her children loved she,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He would have ween’d<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2599" id="noteref-2599" epub:type="noteref">2599</a> that of some subtilty,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And of malíce, or for cruel coráge,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2600" id="noteref-2600" epub:type="noteref">2600</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>She haddë suffer’d this with sad<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2601" id="noteref-2601" epub:type="noteref">2601</a> viságe.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>But well he knew, that, next himself, certáin</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She lov’d her children best in every wise.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But now of women would I askë fain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If these assayës mightë not suffice?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What could a sturdy<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2602" id="noteref-2602" epub:type="noteref">2602</a> husband more devise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To prove her wifehood and her steadfastness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And he continuing ev’r in sturdiness?</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>But there be folk of such conditión,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That, when they have a certain purpose take,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thiey cannot stint<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2603" id="noteref-2603" epub:type="noteref">2603</a> of their intentión,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, right as they were bound unto a stake,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They will not of their firstë purpose slake:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2604" id="noteref-2604" epub:type="noteref">2604</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Right so this marquis fully hath purpós’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To tempt his wife, as he was first dispos’d.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He waited, if by word or countenance</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That she to him was changed of coráge:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2605" id="noteref-2605" epub:type="noteref">2605</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>But never could he findë variance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She was aye one in heart and in viságe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And aye the farther that she was in age,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The morë true (if that it were possíble)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She was to him in love, and more penible.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2606" id="noteref-2606" epub:type="noteref">2606</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>For which it seemed thus, that of them two</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There was but one will; for, as Walter lest,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2607" id="noteref-2607" epub:type="noteref">2607</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>The same pleasáncë was her lust also;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, God be thanked, all fell for the best.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She shewed well, for no worldly unrest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A wife as of herself no thingë should</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Will, in effect, but as her husband would.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The sland’r of Walter wondrous widë sprad,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That of a cruel heart he wickedly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2608" id="noteref-2608" epub:type="noteref">2608</a> he a poorë woman wedded had,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had murder’d both his children privily:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such murmur was among them commonly.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No wonder is: for to the people’s ear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There came no word, but that they murder’d were.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>For which, whereas his people therebefore</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had lov’d him well, the sland’r of his diffame<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2609" id="noteref-2609" epub:type="noteref">2609</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made them that they him hated therëfore.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be a murd’rer is a hateful name.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But natheless, for earnest or for game,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He of his cruel purpose would not stent;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2610" id="noteref-2610" epub:type="noteref">2610</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>To tempt his wife was set all his intent.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>When that his daughter twelve year was of age,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He to the Court of Rome, in subtle wise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Informed of his will, sent his messáge,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2611" id="noteref-2611" epub:type="noteref">2611</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Commanding him such bullës to devise</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As to his cruel purpose may suffice,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How that the Popë, for his people’s rest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bade him to wed another, if him lest.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2612" id="noteref-2612" epub:type="noteref">2612</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>I say he bade they shouldë counterfeit</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The Pope’s bullës, making mentión</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That he had leave his firstë wife to lete,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2613" id="noteref-2613" epub:type="noteref">2613</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>As by the Popë’s dispensatión,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To stintë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2614" id="noteref-2614" epub:type="noteref">2614</a> rancour and dissensión</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Betwixt his people and him: thus spake the bull,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The which they havë published at full.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The rudë people, as no wonder is,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Weened<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2615" id="noteref-2615" epub:type="noteref">2615</a> full well that it had been right so:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, when these tidings came to Griseldis.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I deemë that her heart was full of woe;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But she, alikë sad<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2616" id="noteref-2616" epub:type="noteref">2616</a> for evermo’,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Disposed was, this humble creatúre,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Th’ adversity of fortune all t’ endure;</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Abiding ever his lust and his pleasánce,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To whom that she was given, heart and all,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As to her very worldly suffisance.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2617" id="noteref-2617" epub:type="noteref">2617</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, shortly if this story tell I shall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The marquis written hath in special</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A letter, in which he shewed his intent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And secretly it to Bologna sent.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>To th’ earl of Panico, which haddë tho<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2618" id="noteref-2618" epub:type="noteref">2618</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wedded his sister, pray’d he specially</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To bringë home again his children two</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In honourable estate all openly:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But one thing he him prayed utterly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That he to no wight, though men would inquere,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shouldë not tell whose children that they were,</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>But say, the maiden should y-wedded be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unto the marquis of Salúce anon.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And as this earl was prayed, so did he,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For, at day set, he on his way is gone</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Toward Salúce, and lordës many a one</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In rich array, this maiden for to guide⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her youngë brother riding her beside.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Arrayed was toward<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2619" id="noteref-2619" epub:type="noteref">2619</a> her marriáge</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This freshë maiden, full of gemmës clear;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her brother, which that seven year was of age,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Arrayed eke full fresh in his mannére:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thus, in great nobléss, and with glad cheer,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Toward Saluces shaping their journéy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>From day to day they rode upon their way.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-clerks-tale-body-5" epub:type="part">
					<h4 xml:lang="la">
						<span epub:type="label">Pars</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal">Quinta</span>
					</h4>
					<p>
						<span>Among all this,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2620" id="noteref-2620" epub:type="noteref">2620</a> after his wick’ uságe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The marquis, yet his wife to temptë more</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To the uttermost proof of her coráge,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fully to have experience and lore<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2621" id="noteref-2621" epub:type="noteref">2621</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>If that she were as steadfast as before,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He on a day, in open audience,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Full boisterously said her this senténce:</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Certes, Griseld’, I had enough pleasánce</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To have you to my wife, for your goodness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And for your truth, and for your obeisánce,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not for your lineage, nor for your richéss;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But now know I, in very soothfastness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That in great lordship, if I well advise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There is great servitude in sundry wise.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“I may not do as every ploughman may:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My people me constraineth for to take</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Another wife, and cryeth day by day;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And eke the Popë, rancour for to slake,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Consenteth it, that dare I undertake:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And truëly, thus much I will you say,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My newë wife is coming by the way.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Be strong of heart, and void anon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2622" id="noteref-2622" epub:type="noteref">2622</a> her place;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2623" id="noteref-2623" epub:type="noteref">2623</a> dower that ye brought to me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Take it again, I grant it of my grace.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Returnë to your father’s house,” quoth he;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“No man may always have prosperity;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With even heart I rede<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2624" id="noteref-2624" epub:type="noteref">2624</a> you to endure</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The stroke of fortune or of áventúre.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And she again answér’d in patience:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“My Lord,” quoth she, “I know, and knew alway,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How that betwixtë your magnificence</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And my povert’ no wight nor can nor may</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Make comparison, it is no nay;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2625" id="noteref-2625" epub:type="noteref">2625</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>I held me never digne<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2626" id="noteref-2626" epub:type="noteref">2626</a> in no mannére</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be your wife, nor yet your chamberére.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2627" id="noteref-2627" epub:type="noteref">2627</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“And in this house, where ye me lady made,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(The highë God take I for my witness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all so wisly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2628" id="noteref-2628" epub:type="noteref">2628</a> he my soulë glade),</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I never held me lady nor mistress,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But humble servant to your worthiness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And ever shall, while that my life may dure,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Aboven every worldly creatúre.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“That ye so long, of your benignity,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have holden me in honour and nobley,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2629" id="noteref-2629" epub:type="noteref">2629</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where as I was not worthy for to be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That thank I God and you, to whom I pray</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Foryield<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2630" id="noteref-2630" epub:type="noteref">2630</a> it you; there is no more to say:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unto my father gladly will I wend,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2631" id="noteref-2631" epub:type="noteref">2631</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with him dwell, unto my lifë’s end,</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Where I was foster’d as a child full small,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till I be dead my life there will I lead,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A widow clean in body, heart, and all.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For since I gave to you my maidenhead,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And am your truë wife, it is no dread,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2632" id="noteref-2632" epub:type="noteref">2632</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>God shieldë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2633" id="noteref-2633" epub:type="noteref">2633</a> such a lordë’s wife to take</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Another man to husband or to make.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2634" id="noteref-2634" epub:type="noteref">2634</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“And of your newë wife, God of his grace</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So grant you weal and all prosperity:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For I will gladly yield to her my place,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In which that I was blissful wont to be.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For since it liketh you, my Lord,” quoth she,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“That whilom weren all mine heartë’s rest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I shall go, I will go when you lest.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“But whereas ye me proffer such dowaire</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As I first brought, it is well in my mind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It was my wretched clothës, nothing fair,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The which to me were hard now for to find.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O goodë God! how gentle and how kind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ye seemed by your speech and your viságe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The day that maked was our marriáge!</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“But sooth is said⁠—algate<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2635" id="noteref-2635" epub:type="noteref">2635</a> I find it true,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For in effect it proved is on me⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Love is not old as when that it is new.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But certes, Lord, for no adversity,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To dien in this case, it shall not be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That e’er in word or work I shall repent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I you gave mine heart in whole intent.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“My Lord, ye know that in my father’s place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ye did me strip out of my poorë weed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2636" id="noteref-2636" epub:type="noteref">2636</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And richëly ye clad me of your grace;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To you brought I nought ellës, out of dread,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But faith, and nakedness, and maidenhead;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And here again your clothing I restore,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And eke your wedding ring for evermore.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“The remnant of your jewels ready be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Within your chamber, I dare safely sayn:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Naked out of my father’s house,” quoth she,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“I came, and naked I must turn again.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All your pleasance would I follow fain:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2637" id="noteref-2637" epub:type="noteref">2637</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>But yet I hope it be not your intent</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That smockless<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2638" id="noteref-2638" epub:type="noteref">2638</a> I out of your palace went.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Ye could not do so dishonést<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2639" id="noteref-2639" epub:type="noteref">2639</a> a thing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That thilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2640" id="noteref-2640" epub:type="noteref">2640</a> womb, in which your children lay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shouldë before the people, in my walking,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be seen all bare: and therefore I you pray,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let me not like a worm go by the way:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Remember you, mine owen Lord so dear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I was your wife, though I unworthy were.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Wherefore, in guerdon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2641" id="noteref-2641" epub:type="noteref">2641</a> of my maidenhead,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which that I brought and not again I bear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As vouchësafe to give me to my meed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2642" id="noteref-2642" epub:type="noteref">2642</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>But such a smock as I was wont to wear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I therewith may wrie<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2643" id="noteref-2643" epub:type="noteref">2643</a> the womb of her</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That was your wife: and here I take my leave</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of you, mine owen Lord, lest I you grieve.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“The smock,” quoth he, “that thou hast on thy back,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let it be still, and bear it forth with thee.”</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But well unnethës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2644" id="noteref-2644" epub:type="noteref">2644</a> thilkë word he spake,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But went his way for ruth and for pitý.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before the folk herselfë stripped she,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in her smock, with foot and head all bare,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Toward her father’s house forth is she fare.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2645" id="noteref-2645" epub:type="noteref">2645</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The folk her follow’d weeping on her way,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And fortune aye they cursed as they gon:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2646" id="noteref-2646" epub:type="noteref">2646</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>But she from weeping kept her eyen drey,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2647" id="noteref-2647" epub:type="noteref">2647</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor in this timë wordë spake she none.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her father, that this tiding heard anon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Cursed the day and timë, that natúre</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shope<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2648" id="noteref-2648" epub:type="noteref">2648</a> him to be a living creatúre.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>For, out of doubt, this oldë poorë man</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was ever in suspéct of her marriáge:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For ever deem’d he, since it first began,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That when the lord fulfill’d had his coráge,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2649" id="noteref-2649" epub:type="noteref">2649</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>He wouldë think it were a disparáge<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2650" id="noteref-2650" epub:type="noteref">2650</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>To his estate, so low for to alight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And voidë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2651" id="noteref-2651" epub:type="noteref">2651</a> her as soon as e’er he might.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Against<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2652" id="noteref-2652" epub:type="noteref">2652</a> his daughter hastily went he</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(For he by noise of folk knew her coming),</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with her oldë coat, as it might be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He cover’d her, full sorrowfully weepíng:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But on her body might he it not bring,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2653" id="noteref-2653" epub:type="noteref">2653</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>For rudë was the cloth, and more of age</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By dayës fele<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2654" id="noteref-2654" epub:type="noteref">2654</a> than at her marriáge.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Thus with her father for a certain space</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dwelled this flow’r of wifely patience,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That neither by her words nor by her face,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before the folk nor eke in their absence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ne shewed she that her was done offence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor of her high estate no rémembránce</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ne haddë she, as by<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2655" id="noteref-2655" epub:type="noteref">2655</a> her countenance.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>No wonder is, for in her great estate</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her ghost<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2656" id="noteref-2656" epub:type="noteref">2656</a> was ever in plein<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2657" id="noteref-2657" epub:type="noteref">2657</a> humility;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No tender mouth, no heartë delicate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No pomp, and no semblánt of royalty;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But full of patient benignity,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Discreet and pridëless, aye honouráble,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to her husband ever meek and stable.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Men speak of Job, and most for his humbléss,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As clerkës, when them list, can well indite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Namely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2658" id="noteref-2658" epub:type="noteref">2658</a> of men; but, as in soothfastness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though clerkës praisë women but a lite,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2659" id="noteref-2659" epub:type="noteref">2659</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>There can no man in humbless him acquite</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As women can, nor can be half so true</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As women be, but it be fall of new.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2660" id="noteref-2660" epub:type="noteref">2660</a></span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-clerks-tale-body-6" epub:type="part">
					<h4 xml:lang="la">
						<span epub:type="label">Pars</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal">Sexta</span>
					</h4>
					<p>
						<span>From Bologn’ is the earl of Panic’ come,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of which the fame up sprang to more and less;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to the people’s earës all and some</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Was know’n eke, that a newë marchioness</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He with him brought, in such pomp and richéss</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That never was there seen with mannë’s eye</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So noble array in all West Lombardy.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The marquis, which that shope<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2661" id="noteref-2661" epub:type="noteref">2661</a> and knew all this,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ere that the earl was come, sent his messáge<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2662" id="noteref-2662" epub:type="noteref">2662</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>For thilkë poorë sely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2663" id="noteref-2663" epub:type="noteref">2663</a> Griseldis;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And she, with humble heart and glad viságe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor with no swelling thought in her coráge,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2664" id="noteref-2664" epub:type="noteref">2664</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Came at his hest,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2665" id="noteref-2665" epub:type="noteref">2665</a> and on her knees her set,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And rev’rently and wisely she him gret.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2666" id="noteref-2666" epub:type="noteref">2666</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Griseld’,” quoth he, “my will is utterly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This maiden, that shall wedded be to me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Received be to-morrow as royally</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As it possible is in my house to be;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And eke that every wight in his degree</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have his estate<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2667" id="noteref-2667" epub:type="noteref">2667</a> in sitting and servíce,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in high pleasance, as I can devise.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“I have no women sufficient, certáin,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The chambers to array in ordinance</span>
						<br/>
						<span>After my lust;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2668" id="noteref-2668" epub:type="noteref">2668</a> and therefore would I fain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That thine were all such manner governance:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou knowest eke of old all my pleasánce;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though thine array be bad, and ill besey,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2669" id="noteref-2669" epub:type="noteref">2669</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Do thou thy dévoir at the leastë way.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2670" id="noteref-2670" epub:type="noteref">2670</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Not only, Lord, that I am glad,” quoth she,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“To do your lust, but I desire also</span>
						<br/>
						<span>You for to serve and please in my degree,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Withoutë fainting, and shall evermo’:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor ever for no weal, nor for no woe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ne shall the ghost<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2671" id="noteref-2671" epub:type="noteref">2671</a> within mine heartë stent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2672" id="noteref-2672" epub:type="noteref">2672</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>To love you best with all my true intent.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And with that word she gan the house to dight,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2673" id="noteref-2673" epub:type="noteref">2673</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And tables for to set, and beds to make,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And pained her<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2674" id="noteref-2674" epub:type="noteref">2674</a> to do all that she might,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Praying the chamberéres for Goddë’s sake</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To hasten them, and fastë sweep and shake,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And she the most servíceable of all</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hath ev’ry chamber arrayed, and his hall.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Abouten undern<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2675" id="noteref-2675" epub:type="noteref">2675</a> gan the earl alight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That with him brought these noble children tway;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For which the people ran to see the sight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of their array, so richëly besey;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2676" id="noteref-2676" epub:type="noteref">2676</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And then at erst<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2677" id="noteref-2677" epub:type="noteref">2677</a> amongës them they say,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That Walter was no fool, though that him lest<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2678" id="noteref-2678" epub:type="noteref">2678</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>To change his wife; for it was for the best.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>For she is fairer, as they deemen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2679" id="noteref-2679" epub:type="noteref">2679</a> all,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than is Griseld’, and more tender of age,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And fairer fruit between them shouldë fall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And morë pleasant, for her high lineage:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her brother eke so fair was of viságe,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That them to see the people hath caught pleasánce,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Commending now the marquis’ governance.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“O stormy people, unsad<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2680" id="noteref-2680" epub:type="noteref">2680</a> and ev’r untrue,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And undiscreet, and changing as a vane,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Delighting ev’r in rumour that is new,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For like the moon so waxë ye and wane:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Aye full of clapping, dear enough a jane,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2681" id="noteref-2681" epub:type="noteref">2681</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your doom<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2682" id="noteref-2682" epub:type="noteref">2682</a> is false, your constance evil preveth,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2683" id="noteref-2683" epub:type="noteref">2683</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>A full great fool is he that you believeth.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Thus saidë the sad<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2684" id="noteref-2684" epub:type="noteref">2684</a> folk in that citý,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When that the people gazed up and down;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For they were glad, right for the novelty,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To have a newë lady of their town.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No more of this now make I mentioún,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But to Griseld’ again I will me dress,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And tell her constancy and business.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Full busy was Griseld’ in ev’ry thing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That to the feastë was appertinent;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Right nought was she abash’d<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2685" id="noteref-2685" epub:type="noteref">2685</a> of her clothing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though it were rude, and somedeal eke to-rent;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2686" id="noteref-2686" epub:type="noteref">2686</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>But with glad cheer unto the gate she went</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With other folk, to greet the marchioness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And after that did forth her business.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>With so glad cheer his guestës she receiv’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And so conningly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2687" id="noteref-2687" epub:type="noteref">2687</a> each in his degree,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That no defaultë no man apperceiv’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But aye they wonder’d what she mightë be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That in so poor array was for to see,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And coudë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2688" id="noteref-2688" epub:type="noteref">2688</a> such honoúr and reverence;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And worthily they praisë her prudence.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>In all this meanë whilë she not stent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2689" id="noteref-2689" epub:type="noteref">2689</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>This maid, and eke her brother, to commend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With all her heart in full benign intent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So well, that no man could her praise amend:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But at the last, when that these lordës wend<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2690" id="noteref-2690" epub:type="noteref">2690</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>To sittë down to meat, he gan to call</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Griseld’, as she was busy in the hall.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Griseld’,” quoth he, as it were in his play,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“How liketh thee my wife, and her beauty?”</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Right well, my Lord,” quoth she, “for, in good fay,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2691" id="noteref-2691" epub:type="noteref">2691</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>A fairer saw I never none than she:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I pray to God give you prosperity;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And so I hope, that he will to you send</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Pleasance enough unto your livës’ end.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“One thing beseech I you, and warn also,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That ye not prickë with no tórmentíng</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This tender maiden, as ye have done mo:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2692" id="noteref-2692" epub:type="noteref">2692</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>For she is foster’d in her nourishing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>More tenderly, and, to my supposing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She mightë not adversity endure</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As could a poorë foster’d creatúre.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And when this Walter saw her patience,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her gladdë cheer, and no malíce at all,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2693" id="noteref-2693" epub:type="noteref">2693</a> he so often had her done offence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And she aye sad<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2694" id="noteref-2694" epub:type="noteref">2694</a> and constant as a wall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Continuing ev’r her innocence o’er all,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The sturdy marquis gan his heartë dress<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2695" id="noteref-2695" epub:type="noteref">2695</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>To rue upon her wifely steadfastness.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“This is enough, Griselda mine,” quoth he,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Be now no more aghast, nor evil paid,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2696" id="noteref-2696" epub:type="noteref">2696</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>I have thy faith and thy benignity</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As well as ever woman was, assay’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In great estate and poorëly array’d:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now know I, dearë wife, thy steadfastness;”</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And her in arms he took, and gan to kiss.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And she for wonder took of it no keep;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2697" id="noteref-2697" epub:type="noteref">2697</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>She heardë not what thing he to her said:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She far’d as she had start out of a sleep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till she out of her mazedness abraid.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2698" id="noteref-2698" epub:type="noteref">2698</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Griseld’,” quoth he, “by God that for us died,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou art my wifë, none other I have,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor ever had, as God my soulë save.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“This is thy daughter, which thou hast suppos’d</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To be my wife; that other faithfully</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall be mine heir, as I have aye dispos’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou bare them of thy body truëly:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At Bologna kept I them privily:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Take them again, for now may’st thou not say</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That thou hast lorn<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2699" id="noteref-2699" epub:type="noteref">2699</a> none of thy children tway.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“And folk, that otherwise have said of me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I warn them well, that I have done this deed</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For no malíce, nor for no cruelty,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But to assay in thee thy womanhead:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And not to slay my children (God forbid),</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But for to keep them privily and still,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till I thy purpose knew, and all thy will.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>When she this heard, in swoon adown she falleth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For piteous joy; and after her swooning,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She both her youngë children to her calleth,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in her armës piteously weeping</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Embraced them, and tenderly kissing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Full like a mother, with her saltë tears</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She bathed both their visage and their hairs.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>O, what a piteous thing it was to see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her swooning, and her humble voice to hear!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“<i xml:lang="fr">Grand mercy</i>, Lord, God thank it you,” quoth she,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That ye have saved me my children dear;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now reck<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2700" id="noteref-2700" epub:type="noteref">2700</a> I never to be dead right here;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Since I stand in your love, and in your grace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No force of<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2701" id="noteref-2701" epub:type="noteref">2701</a> death, nor when my spirit pace.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2702" id="noteref-2702" epub:type="noteref">2702</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“O tender, O dear, O young children mine,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your woeful mother weened steadfastly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2703" id="noteref-2703" epub:type="noteref">2703</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>That cruel houndës, or some foul vermíne,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had eaten you; but God of his mercy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And your benignë father tenderly</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have done you keep:”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2704" id="noteref-2704" epub:type="noteref">2704</a> and in that samë stound,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2705" id="noteref-2705" epub:type="noteref">2705</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>All suddenly she swapt<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2706" id="noteref-2706" epub:type="noteref">2706</a> down to the ground.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And in her swoon so sadly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2707" id="noteref-2707" epub:type="noteref">2707</a> holdeth she</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her children two, when she gan them embrace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That with great sleight<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2708" id="noteref-2708" epub:type="noteref">2708</a> and great difficulty</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The children from her arm they can arace,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2709" id="noteref-2709" epub:type="noteref">2709</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>O! many a tear on many a piteous face</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Down ran of them that stoodë her beside,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unneth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2710" id="noteref-2710" epub:type="noteref">2710</a> aboutë her might they abide.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Walter her gladdeth, and her sorrow slaketh:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2711" id="noteref-2711" epub:type="noteref">2711</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>She riseth up abashed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2712" id="noteref-2712" epub:type="noteref">2712</a> from her trance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And every wight her joy and feastë maketh,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till she hath caught again her countenance.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Walter her doth so faithfully pleasánce,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That it was dainty for to see the cheer</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Betwixt them two, since they be met in fere.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2713" id="noteref-2713" epub:type="noteref">2713</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>The ladies, when that they their timë sey,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2714" id="noteref-2714" epub:type="noteref">2714</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Have taken her, and into chamber gone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And stripped her out of her rude array,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in a cloth of gold that brightly shone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with a crown of many a richë stone</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon her head, they into hall her brought:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And there she was honoúred as her ought.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Thus had this piteous day a blissful end;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For every man and woman did his might</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This day in mirth and revel to dispend,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till on the welkin<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2715" id="noteref-2715" epub:type="noteref">2715</a> shone the starrës bright:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For more solémn in every mannë’s sight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This feastë was, and greater of costage,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2716" id="noteref-2716" epub:type="noteref">2716</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than was the revel of her marriáge.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Full many a year in high prosperity</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lived these two in concord and in rest;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And richëly his daughter married he</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unto a lord, one of the worthiest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of all Itále; and then in peace and rest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His wifë’s father in his court he kept,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till that the soul out of his body crept.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>His son succeeded in his heritage,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In rest and peace, after his father’s day:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And fortunate was eke in marriáge,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2717" id="noteref-2717" epub:type="noteref">2717</a> he put not his wife in great assay:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This world is not so strong, it is no nay,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2718" id="noteref-2718" epub:type="noteref">2718</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>As it hath been in oldë timës yore;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And hearken what this author saith, therefore;</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>This story is said,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2719" id="noteref-2719" epub:type="noteref">2719</a> not for that wivës should</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Follow Griselda in humility,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For it were importáble<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2720" id="noteref-2720" epub:type="noteref">2720</a> though they would;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But for that every wight in his degree</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shouldë be constant in adversity,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As was Griselda; therefore Petrarch writeth</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This story, which with high style he inditeth.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>For, since a woman was so patient</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unto a mortal man, well more we ought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Receiven all in gree<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2721" id="noteref-2721" epub:type="noteref">2721</a> that God us sent.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For great skill is he proved that he wrought:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2722" id="noteref-2722" epub:type="noteref">2722</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>But he tempteth no man that he hath bought,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As saith Saint James, if ye his ’pistle read;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He proveth folk all day, it is no dread.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2723" id="noteref-2723" epub:type="noteref">2723</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And suffereth us, for our exercise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With sharpë scourges of adversity</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Full often to be beat in sundry wise;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Not for to know our will, for certes he,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ere we were born, knew all our fraïlty;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And for our best is all his governance;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let us then live in virtuous sufferance.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>But one word, lordings, hearken, ere I go:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It were full hard to findë now-a-days</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In all a town Griseldas three or two:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For, if that they were put to such assays,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The gold of them hath now so bad allays<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2724" id="noteref-2724" epub:type="noteref">2724</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>With brass, that though the coin be fair at eye,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2725" id="noteref-2725" epub:type="noteref">2725</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>It wouldë rather break in two than ply.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2726" id="noteref-2726" epub:type="noteref">2726</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>For which here, for the Wifë’s love of Bath⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whose life and all her sex may God maintain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In high mast’rý, and ellës were it scath⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2727" id="noteref-2727" epub:type="noteref">2727</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>I will, with lusty heartë fresh and green,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Say you a song to gladden you, I ween:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And let us stint of earnestful mattére.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hearken my song, that saith in this mannére.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="lenvoy-of-chaucer" epub:type="part">
					<h4 epub:type="title">L’Envoy of Chaucer</h4>
					<p>
						<span>“Griseld’ is dead, and eke her patience,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And both at once are buried in Itále:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For which I cry in open audience,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No wedded man so hardy be t’ assail</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His wifë’s patience, in trust to find</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Griselda’s, for in certain he shall fail.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“O noble wivës, full of high prudence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Let no humility your tonguës nail:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor let no clerk have cause or diligence</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To write of you a story of such marvail,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As of Griselda patient and kind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lest Chichëvache<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2728" id="noteref-2728" epub:type="noteref">2728</a> you swallow in her entrail.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Follow Echo, that holdeth no silence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But ever answereth at the countertail;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2729" id="noteref-2729" epub:type="noteref">2729</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be not bedaffed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2730" id="noteref-2730" epub:type="noteref">2730</a> for your innocence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But sharply take on you the governail;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2731" id="noteref-2731" epub:type="noteref">2731</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Imprintë well this lesson in your mind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For common profit, since it may avail.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Ye archiwivës,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2732" id="noteref-2732" epub:type="noteref">2732</a> stand aye at defence,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Since ye be strong as is a great camail,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2733" id="noteref-2733" epub:type="noteref">2733</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor suffer not that men do you offence.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And slender wivës, feeble in battail,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be eager as a tiger yond in Ind;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Aye clapping as a mill, I you counsail.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“Nor dread them not, nor do them reverence;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For though thine husband armed be in mail,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The arrows of thy crabbed eloquence</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall pierce his breast, and eke his aventail;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2734" id="noteref-2734" epub:type="noteref">2734</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>In jealousy I rede<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2735" id="noteref-2735" epub:type="noteref">2735</a> eke thou him bind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thou shalt make him couch<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2736" id="noteref-2736" epub:type="noteref">2736</a> as doth a quail.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“If thou be fair, where folk be in presénce</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shew thou thy visage and thine apparail:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If thou be foul, be free of thy dispence;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To get thee friendës aye do thy travail:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be aye of cheer as light as leaf on lind,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2737" id="noteref-2737" epub:type="noteref">2737</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And let him care, and weep, and wring, and wail.”</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
