<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Man of Law’s Tale</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:poem">
		<section id="the-man-of-laws-tale" epub:type="division">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Man of Law’s Tale</h2>
			<section id="the-man-of-laws-tale-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Prologue</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Our Hostë saw well that the brightë sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ arc of his artificial day had run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fourthë part, and half an hourë more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, though he were not deep expert in lore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wist it was the eight-and-twenty day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of April, that is messenger to May;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saw well that the shadow of every tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was in its length of the same quantity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was the body erect that caused it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore by the shadow he took his wit,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1401" id="noteref-1401" epub:type="noteref">1401</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Phoebus, which that shone so clear and bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Degrees was five-and-forty clomb on height;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for that day, as in that latitude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was ten of the clock, he gan conclude;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And suddenly he plight<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1402" id="noteref-1402" epub:type="noteref">1402</a> his horse about.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Lordings,” quoth he, “I warn you all this rout,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1403" id="noteref-1403" epub:type="noteref">1403</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fourthë partie of this day is gone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now for the love of God and of Saint John</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Losë no time, as farforth as ye may.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lordings, the timë wasteth night and day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And steals from us, what privily sleepíng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what through negligence in our wakíng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As doth the stream, that turneth never again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Descending from the mountain to the plain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well might Senec, and many a philosópher,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bewailë timë more than gold in coffer.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For loss of chattels may recover’d be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But loss of timë shendeth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1404" id="noteref-1404" epub:type="noteref">1404</a> us, quoth he.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It will not come again, withoutë dread,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1405" id="noteref-1405" epub:type="noteref">1405</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>No morë than will Malkin’s maidenhead,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1406" id="noteref-1406" epub:type="noteref">1406</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>When she hath lost it in her wantonness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us not mouldë thus in idleness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sir Man of Law,” quoth he, “so have ye bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell us a tale anon, as forword is.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1407" id="noteref-1407" epub:type="noteref">1407</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye be submitted through your free assent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To stand in this case at my judgëment.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Acquit you now, and holdë your behest;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1408" id="noteref-1408" epub:type="noteref">1408</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then have ye done your dévoir<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1409" id="noteref-1409" epub:type="noteref">1409</a> at the least.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Hostë,” quoth he, “<i xml:lang="fr">de par dieux jeo asente</i>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1410" id="noteref-1410" epub:type="noteref">1410</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To breakë forword is not mine intent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behest is debt, and I would hold it fain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All my behest; I can no better sayn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For such law as a man gives another wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He should himselfë usen it by right.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus will our text: but natheless certáin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I can right now no thrifty<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1411" id="noteref-1411" epub:type="noteref">1411</a> talë sayn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Chaucer (though he can but lewëdly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1412" id="noteref-1412" epub:type="noteref">1412</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>On metres and on rhyming craftily)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath said them, in such English as he can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of oldë time, as knoweth many a man.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if he have not said them, levë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1413" id="noteref-1413" epub:type="noteref">1413</a> brother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In one book, he hath said them in another</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he hath told of lovers up and down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than Ovidë made of mentioun<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1414" id="noteref-1414" epub:type="noteref">1414</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his Epistolae, that be full old.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should I tellë them, since they he told?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In youth he made of Ceyx and Alcyon,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1415" id="noteref-1415" epub:type="noteref">1415</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And since then he hath spoke of every one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These noble wivës, and these lovers eke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whoso that will his largë volume seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Called the Saintës’ Legend of Cupíd:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1416" id="noteref-1416" epub:type="noteref">1416</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>There may he see the largë woundës wide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Lucrece, and of Babylon Thisbé;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sword of Dido for the false Enée;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tree of Phillis for her Demophon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The plaint of Diane, and of Hermion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Ariadne, and Hypsipilé;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The barren islë standing in the sea;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The drown’d Leander for his fair Heró;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tearës of Heléne, and eke the woe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Briseïs, and Laodamia;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cruelty of thee, Queen Medeá,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy little children hanging by the halse,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1417" id="noteref-1417" epub:type="noteref">1417</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thy Jason, that was of love so false.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hypermnestra, Pénelop’, Alcest’,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your wifehood he commendeth with the best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But certainly no wordë writeth he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thilkë wick’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1418" id="noteref-1418" epub:type="noteref">1418</a> example of Canacé,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That loved her own brother sinfully;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Of all such cursed stories I say, Fy),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or else of Tyrius Apollonius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How that the cursed king Antiochus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bereft his daughter of her maidenhead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is so horrible a tale to read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he her threw upon the pavëment.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore he, of full avisëment,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1419" id="noteref-1419" epub:type="noteref">1419</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would never write in none of his sermons</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of such unkind<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1420" id="noteref-1420" epub:type="noteref">1420</a> abominatións;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor I will none rehearse, if that I may.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But of my tale how shall I do this day?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me were loth to be liken’d doubtëless</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Muses, that men call Pieridés<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1421" id="noteref-1421" epub:type="noteref">1421</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>(<i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Metamorphoseos</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1422" id="noteref-1422" epub:type="noteref">1422</a> wot what I mean),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But natheless I reckë not a bean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though I come after him with hawëbake;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1423" id="noteref-1423" epub:type="noteref">1423</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I speak in prose, and let him rhymës make.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with that word, he with a sober cheer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Began his tale, and said as ye shall hear.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-man-of-laws-tale-main" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Tale<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1424" id="noteref-1424" epub:type="noteref">1424</a></h3>
				<p>
					<span>O scatheful harm, condition of povérty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thirst, with cold, with hunger so confounded;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To askë help thee shameth in thine heartë;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou none ask, so sore art thou y-wounded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That very need unwrappeth all thy wound hid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Maugré thine head thou must for indigence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or steal, or beg, or borrow thy dispence.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1425" id="noteref-1425" epub:type="noteref">1425</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thou blamest Christ, and sayst full bitterly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He misdeparteth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1426" id="noteref-1426" epub:type="noteref">1426</a> riches temporal;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy neighëbour thou witest<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1427" id="noteref-1427" epub:type="noteref">1427</a> sinfully,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sayst, thou hast too little, and he hath all:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Parfay (sayst thou) sometime he reckon shall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that his tail shall brennen in the glede,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1428" id="noteref-1428" epub:type="noteref">1428</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he not help’d the needful in their need.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hearken what is the sentence of the wise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Better to die than to have indigence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy selvë neighëbour<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1429" id="noteref-1429" epub:type="noteref">1429</a> will thee despise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou be poor, farewell thy reverence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet of the wisë man take this senténce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Allë the days of poorë men be wick’,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1430" id="noteref-1430" epub:type="noteref">1430</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beware therefore ere thou come to that prick.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1431" id="noteref-1431" epub:type="noteref">1431</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>If thou be poor, thy brother hateth thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all thy friendës flee from thee, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O richë merchants, full of wealth be ye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O noble, prudent folk, as in this case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your baggës be not fill’d with ambës ace,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1432" id="noteref-1432" epub:type="noteref">1432</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with six-<i xml:lang="fr">cinque</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1433" id="noteref-1433" epub:type="noteref">1433</a> that runneth for your chance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Christenmass well merry may ye dance.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ye seekë land and sea for your winníngs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As wisë folk ye knowen all th’ estate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of regnës;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1434" id="noteref-1434" epub:type="noteref">1434</a> ye be fathers of tidings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And talës, both of peace and of debate:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1435" id="noteref-1435" epub:type="noteref">1435</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I were right now of talës desolate,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1436" id="noteref-1436" epub:type="noteref">1436</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that a merchant, gone in many a year,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me taught a tale, which ye shall after hear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In Syria whilom dwelt a company</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of chapmen rich, and thereto sad<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1437" id="noteref-1437" epub:type="noteref">1437</a> and true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That widëwherë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1438" id="noteref-1438" epub:type="noteref">1438</a> sent their spicery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clothës of gold, and satins rich of hue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their chaffare<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1439" id="noteref-1439" epub:type="noteref">1439</a> was so thriftly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1440" id="noteref-1440" epub:type="noteref">1440</a> and so new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That every wight had dainty<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1441" id="noteref-1441" epub:type="noteref">1441</a> to chaffare<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1442" id="noteref-1442" epub:type="noteref">1442</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>With them, and eke to sellë them their ware.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now fell it, that the masters of that sort</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have shapen them<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1443" id="noteref-1443" epub:type="noteref">1443</a> to Romë for to wend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were it for chapmanhood<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1444" id="noteref-1444" epub:type="noteref">1444</a> or for disport,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>None other message would they thither send,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But come themselves to Rome, this is the end:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in such place as thought them ávantage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For their intent, they took their herbergage.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1445" id="noteref-1445" epub:type="noteref">1445</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Sojourned have these merchants in that town</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A certain time as fell to their pleasance:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so befell, that th’ excellent renown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of th’ emperorë’s daughter, Dame Constance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reported was, with every circumstance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto these Syrian merchants in such wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From day to day, as I shall you devise<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1446" id="noteref-1446" epub:type="noteref">1446</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This was the common voice of every man:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Our emperor of Romë, God him see,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1447" id="noteref-1447" epub:type="noteref">1447</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>A daughter hath, that since the world began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To reckon as well her goodness and beautý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was never such another as is she:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray to God in honour her sustene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And would she were of all Európe the queen.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“In her is highë beauty without pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And youth withoutë greenhood<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1448" id="noteref-1448" epub:type="noteref">1448</a> or follý:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To all her workës virtue is her guide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Humbless hath slain in her all tyranny:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She is the mirror of all courtesy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her heart a very chamber of holiness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her hand miníster of freedom for almess.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1449" id="noteref-1449" epub:type="noteref">1449</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And all this voice was sooth, as God is true;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now to purpose<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1450" id="noteref-1450" epub:type="noteref">1450</a> let us turn again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These merchants have done freight<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1451" id="noteref-1451" epub:type="noteref">1451</a> their shippës new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when they have this blissful maiden seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Homë to Syria then they went full fain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And did their needës,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1452" id="noteref-1452" epub:type="noteref">1452</a> as they have done yore,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1453" id="noteref-1453" epub:type="noteref">1453</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And liv’d in weal;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1454" id="noteref-1454" epub:type="noteref">1454</a> I can you say no more.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now fell it, that these merchants stood in grace<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1455" id="noteref-1455" epub:type="noteref">1455</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of him that was the Soudan<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1456" id="noteref-1456" epub:type="noteref">1456</a> of Syrie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For when they came from any strangë place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would of his benignë courtesy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make them good cheer, and busily espy<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1457" id="noteref-1457" epub:type="noteref">1457</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tidings of sundry regnës,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1458" id="noteref-1458" epub:type="noteref">1458</a> for to lear<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1459" id="noteref-1459" epub:type="noteref">1459</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wonders that they mightë see or hear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Amongës other thingës, speciálly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These merchants have him told of Dame Constance’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So great nobless, in earnest so royálly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That this Soudan hath caught so great pleasance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To have her figure in his remembránce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all his lust,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1460" id="noteref-1460" epub:type="noteref">1460</a> and all his busy cure,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1461" id="noteref-1461" epub:type="noteref">1461</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was for to love her while his life may dure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Paráventure in thilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1462" id="noteref-1462" epub:type="noteref">1462</a> largë book,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which that men call the heaven, y-written was</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With starrës, when that he his birthë took,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he for love should have his death, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in the starrës, clearer than is glass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is written, God wot, whoso could it read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The death of every man withoutë dread.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1463" id="noteref-1463" epub:type="noteref">1463</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In starrës many a winter therebeforn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was writ the death of Hector, Achilles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Pompey, Julius, ere they were born;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The strife of Thebes; and of Hercules,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Samson, Turnus, and of Socrates</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The death; but mennë’s wittës be so dull,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That no wight can well read it at the full.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This Soudan for his privy council sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, shortly of this matter for to pace,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1464" id="noteref-1464" epub:type="noteref">1464</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He hath to them declared his intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And told them certain, but<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1465" id="noteref-1465" epub:type="noteref">1465</a> he might have grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To have Constance, within a little space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was but dead; and charged them in hie<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1466" id="noteref-1466" epub:type="noteref">1466</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shapë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1467" id="noteref-1467" epub:type="noteref">1467</a> for his life some remedy.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Diversë men diversë thingës said;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And arguments they casten up and down;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many a subtle reason forth they laid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They speak of magic, and abusión;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1468" id="noteref-1468" epub:type="noteref">1468</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But finally, as in conclusión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They cannot see in that none ávantage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor in no other way, save marriáge.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then saw they therein such difficulty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By way of reason, for to speak all plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because that there was such diversity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between their bothë lawës, that they sayn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They trowë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1469" id="noteref-1469" epub:type="noteref">1469</a> that no Christian prince would fain<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1470" id="noteref-1470" epub:type="noteref">1470</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wedden his child under our lawë sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That us was given by Mahound<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1471" id="noteref-1471" epub:type="noteref">1471</a> our prophéte.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And he answered: “Rather than I lose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Constance, I will be christen’d doubtëless:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I must be hers, I may none other choose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray you hold your arguments in peace,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1472" id="noteref-1472" epub:type="noteref">1472</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Savë my life, and be not reckëless</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To gettë her that hath my life in cure,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1473" id="noteref-1473" epub:type="noteref">1473</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in this woe I may not long endure.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>What needeth greater dilatation?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say, by treaty and ambassadry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by the Popë’s mediation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the Church, and all the chivalry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in destruction of Mah’metry,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1474" id="noteref-1474" epub:type="noteref">1474</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in increase of Christë’s lawë dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They be accorded<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1475" id="noteref-1475" epub:type="noteref">1475</a> so as ye may hear;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>How that the Soudan, and his baronage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all his lieges, shall y-christen’d be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he shall have Constance in marriáge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And certain gold, I n’ot<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1476" id="noteref-1476" epub:type="noteref">1476</a> what quantity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hereto find they suffisant suretý.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The same accord is sworn on either side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, fair Constance, Almighty God thee guide!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now wouldë some men waiten, as I guess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I should tellen all the purveyance,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1477" id="noteref-1477" epub:type="noteref">1477</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which the emperor of his nobless</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath shapen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1478" id="noteref-1478" epub:type="noteref">1478</a> for his daughter, Dame Constance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well may men know that so great ordinance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May no man tellen in a little clause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As was arrayed for so high a cause.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Bishops be shapen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1479" id="noteref-1479" epub:type="noteref">1479</a> with her for to wend,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1480" id="noteref-1480" epub:type="noteref">1480</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lordës, ladíes, and knightës of renown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And other folk enough, this is the end.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And notified is throughout all the town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That every wight with great devotioún</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should pray to Christ, that he this marriáge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Receive in gree,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1481" id="noteref-1481" epub:type="noteref">1481</a> and speedë this voyáge.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The day is comen of her départíng⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say the woful fatal day is come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That there may be no longer tarrying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But forward they them dressen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1482" id="noteref-1482" epub:type="noteref">1482</a> all and some.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Constance, that was with sorrow all o’ercome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full pale arose, and dressed her to wend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For well she saw there was no other end.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Alas! what wonder is it though she wept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That shall be sent to a strange natión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From friendës, that so tenderly her kept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to be bound under subjectión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of one, she knew not his conditión?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Husbands be all good, and have been of yore,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1483" id="noteref-1483" epub:type="noteref">1483</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That knowë wivës; I dare say no more.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Father,” she said, “thy wretched child Constance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy youngë daughter, foster’d up so soft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And you, my mother, my sov’reign pleasance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over all thing, out-taken<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1484" id="noteref-1484" epub:type="noteref">1484</a> Christ on loft,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1485" id="noteref-1485" epub:type="noteref">1485</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Constance your child her recommendeth oft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto your grace; for I shall to Syrie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor shall I ever see you more with eye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Alas! unto the barbarous natión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I must anon, since that it is your will:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Christ, that starf<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1486" id="noteref-1486" epub:type="noteref">1486</a> for our redemptión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So give me grace his hestës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1487" id="noteref-1487" epub:type="noteref">1487</a> to fulfil.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, wretched woman, no force though I spill!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1488" id="noteref-1488" epub:type="noteref">1488</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Women are born to thraldom and penánce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to be under mannë’s governance.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I trow at Troy when Pyrrhus brake the wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Ilion burnt, or Thebes the city,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor at Rome for the harm through Hannibal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Romans hath y-vanquish’d timës three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was heard such tender weeping for pitý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in the chamber was for her partíng;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But forth she must, whether she weep or sing.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O firstë moving cruel Firmament,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1489" id="noteref-1489" epub:type="noteref">1489</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thy diurnal sway that crowdest<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1490" id="noteref-1490" epub:type="noteref">1490</a> aye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hurtlest all from East till Occident</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That naturally would hold another way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy crowding set the heav’n in such array</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the beginning of this fierce voyáge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That cruel Mars hath slain this marriáge.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Unfortunate ascendant tortuous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which the lord is helpless fall’n, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of his angle into the darkest house;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Mars, O Atyzar,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1491" id="noteref-1491" epub:type="noteref">1491</a> as in this case;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O feeble Moon, unhappy is thy pace.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1492" id="noteref-1492" epub:type="noteref">1492</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou knittest thee where thou art not receiv’d,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1493" id="noteref-1493" epub:type="noteref">1493</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where thou wert well, from thennës art thou weiv’d.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1494" id="noteref-1494" epub:type="noteref">1494</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Imprudent emperor of Rome, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was there no philosópher in all thy town?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is no time bet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1495" id="noteref-1495" epub:type="noteref">1495</a> than other in such case?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of voyage is there none electión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Namely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1496" id="noteref-1496" epub:type="noteref">1496</a> to folk of high conditión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not when a root is of a birth y-know?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1497" id="noteref-1497" epub:type="noteref">1497</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! we be too lewëd,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1498" id="noteref-1498" epub:type="noteref">1498</a> or too slow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To ship was brought this woeful fairë maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Solemnëly, with every circumstance:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now Jesus Christ be with you all,” she said.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no more, but “Farewell, fair Constance.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She pained her<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1499" id="noteref-1499" epub:type="noteref">1499</a> to make good countenance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And forth I let her sail in this mannér,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And turn I will again to my mattér.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The mother of the Soudan, well of vices,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Espied hath her sonë’s plain intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How he will leave his oldë sacrifices:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And right anon she for her council sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they be come, to knowë what she meant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when assembled was this folk in fere,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1500" id="noteref-1500" epub:type="noteref">1500</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>She sat her down, and said as ye shall hear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Lordës,” she said, “ye knowen every one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How that my son in point is for to lete<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1501" id="noteref-1501" epub:type="noteref">1501</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The holy lawës of our Alkaron,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1502" id="noteref-1502" epub:type="noteref">1502</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Given by God’s messenger Mahométe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But one avow to greatë God I hete,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1503" id="noteref-1503" epub:type="noteref">1503</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life shall rather out of my body start,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than Mahomet’s law go out of mine heart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“What should us tiden<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1504" id="noteref-1504" epub:type="noteref">1504</a> of this newë law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thraldom to our bodies, and penánce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And afterward in hell to be y-draw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For we renied Mahound our creance?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1505" id="noteref-1505" epub:type="noteref">1505</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, lordës, will ye maken assurance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I shall say, assenting to my lore?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1506" id="noteref-1506" epub:type="noteref">1506</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I shall make us safe for evermore.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They sworen and assented every man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To live with her and die, and by her stand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every one, in the best wise he can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To strengthen her shall all his friendës fand.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1507" id="noteref-1507" epub:type="noteref">1507</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she hath this emprise taken in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which ye shall hearë that I shall devise;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1508" id="noteref-1508" epub:type="noteref">1508</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to them all she spake right in this wise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“We shall first feign us Christendom to take;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1509" id="noteref-1509" epub:type="noteref">1509</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cold water shall not grieve us but a lite:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1510" id="noteref-1510" epub:type="noteref">1510</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I shall such a feast and revel make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, as I trow, I shall the Soudan quite.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1511" id="noteref-1511" epub:type="noteref">1511</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For though his wife be christen’d ne’er so white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She shall have need to wash away the red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though she a fount of water with her led.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O Soudaness,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1512" id="noteref-1512" epub:type="noteref">1512</a> root of iniquity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Virago thou, Semiramis the secónd!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O serpent under femininity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to the serpent deep in hell y-bound!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O feigned woman, all that may confound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Virtue and innocence, through thy malíce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is bred in thee, as nest of every vice!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O Satan envious! since thilkë day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou wert chased from our heritage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well knowest thou to woman th’ oldë way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou madest Eve to bring us in serváge:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1513" id="noteref-1513" epub:type="noteref">1513</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wilt fordo<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1514" id="noteref-1514" epub:type="noteref">1514</a> this Christian marriáge:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine instrument so (well-away the while!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mak’st thou of women when thou wilt beguile.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This Soudaness, whom I thus blame and warray,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1515" id="noteref-1515" epub:type="noteref">1515</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let privily her council go their way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should I in this talë longer tarry?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She rode unto the Soudan on a day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span id="the-man-of-laws-tale-line-376">And said him, that she would reny her lay,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1516" id="noteref-1516" epub:type="noteref">1516</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Christendom of priestës’ handës fong,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1517" id="noteref-1517" epub:type="noteref">1517</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Repenting her she heathen was so long;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Beseeching him to do her that honour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she might have the Christian folk to feast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“To pleasë them I will do my laboúr.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Soudan said, “I will do at your hest,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1518" id="noteref-1518" epub:type="noteref">1518</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And kneeling, thanked her for that request;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So glad he was, he wist<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1519" id="noteref-1519" epub:type="noteref">1519</a> not what to say.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She kiss’d her son, and home she went her way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Arrived be these Christian folk to land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Syria, with a great solemnë rout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hastily this Soudan sent his sond,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1520" id="noteref-1520" epub:type="noteref">1520</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>First to his mother, and all the realm about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said, his wife was comen out of doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pray’d them for to ride again<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1521" id="noteref-1521" epub:type="noteref">1521</a> the queen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The honour of his regnë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1522" id="noteref-1522" epub:type="noteref">1522</a> to sustene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great was the press, and rich was the array</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Syrians and Romans met in fere.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1523" id="noteref-1523" epub:type="noteref">1523</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mother of the Soudan rich and gay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Received her with all so glad a cheer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1524" id="noteref-1524" epub:type="noteref">1524</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As any mother might her daughter dear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the nextë city there beside</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A softë pace solemnely they ride.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nought, trow I, the triúmph of Julius</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which that Lucan maketh such a boast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was royaller, or morë curious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than was th’ assembly of this blissful host:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But O this scorpion, this wicked ghost,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1525" id="noteref-1525" epub:type="noteref">1525</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Soudaness, for all her flattering</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cast<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1526" id="noteref-1526" epub:type="noteref">1526</a> under this full mortally to sting.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Soudan came himself soon after this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So royally, that wonder is to tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And welcomed her with all joy and bliss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus in mirth and joy I let them dwell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fruit of his mattér is that I tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the time came, men thought it for the best</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That revel stint,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1527" id="noteref-1527" epub:type="noteref">1527</a> and men go to their rest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The time is come that this old Soudaness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ordained hath the feast of which I told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the feast the Christian folk them dress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In general, yea, bothë young and old.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There may men feast and royalty behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dainties more than I can you devise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all too dear they bought it ere they rise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O sudden woe, that ev’r art successoúr</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To worldly bliss! sprent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1528" id="noteref-1528" epub:type="noteref">1528</a> is with bitterness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ end of our joy, of our worldly laboúr;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Woe occupies the fine<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1529" id="noteref-1529" epub:type="noteref">1529</a> of our gladness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hearken this counsel, for thy sickerness:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1530" id="noteref-1530" epub:type="noteref">1530</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon thy gladë days have in thy mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The unware<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1531" id="noteref-1531" epub:type="noteref">1531</a> woe of harm, that comes behind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For, shortly for to tell it at a word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Soudan and the Christians every one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were all to-hewn and sticked at the board,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1532" id="noteref-1532" epub:type="noteref">1532</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But it were only Dame Constance alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This oldë Soudaness, this cursed crone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had with her friendës done this cursed deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she herself would all the country lead.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nor there was Syrian that was converted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of the counsel of the Soudan wot,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1533" id="noteref-1533" epub:type="noteref">1533</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was not all to-hewn, ere he asterted:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1534" id="noteref-1534" epub:type="noteref">1534</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Constance have they ta’en anon foot-hot,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1535" id="noteref-1535" epub:type="noteref">1535</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in a ship all steerëless,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1536" id="noteref-1536" epub:type="noteref">1536</a> God wot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They have her set, and bid her learn to sail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of Syria again-ward to Itale.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1537" id="noteref-1537" epub:type="noteref">1537</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A certain treasure that she thither lad,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1538" id="noteref-1538" epub:type="noteref">1538</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, sooth to say, of victual great plenty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They have her giv’n, and clothës eke she had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And forth she sailed in the saltë sea:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O my Constance, full of benignity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O emperorë’s youngë daughter dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He that is lord of fortune be thy steer!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1539" id="noteref-1539" epub:type="noteref">1539</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She bless’d herself, and with full piteous voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the cross of Christ thus saidë she;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O dear, O wealful<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1540" id="noteref-1540" epub:type="noteref">1540</a> altar, holy cross,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Red of the Lambë’s blood, full of pity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That wash’d the world from old iniquity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me from the fiend and from his clawës keep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That day that I shall drenchen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1541" id="noteref-1541" epub:type="noteref">1541</a> in the deep.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Victorious tree, protection of the true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That only worthy werë for to bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The King of Heaven, with his woundës new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whitë Lamb, that hurt was with a spear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flemer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1542" id="noteref-1542" epub:type="noteref">1542</a> of fiendës out of him and her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On which thy limbës faithfully extend,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1543" id="noteref-1543" epub:type="noteref">1543</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me keep, and give me might my life to mend.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yearës and days floated this creature</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throughout the sea of Greece, unto the strait</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Maroc,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1544" id="noteref-1544" epub:type="noteref">1544</a> as it was her áventure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On many a sorry meal now may she bait,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After her death full often may she wait,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1545" id="noteref-1545" epub:type="noteref">1545</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere that the wildë wavës will her drive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the place there as<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1546" id="noteref-1546" epub:type="noteref">1546</a> she shall arrive.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Men mighten askë, why she was not slain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eke at the feast who might her body save?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I answer to that demand again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who saved Daniel in the horrible cave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where every wight, save he, master or knave,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1547" id="noteref-1547" epub:type="noteref">1547</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was with the lion frett,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1548" id="noteref-1548" epub:type="noteref">1548</a> ere he astart?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1549" id="noteref-1549" epub:type="noteref">1549</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>No wight but God, that he bare in his heart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>God list<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1550" id="noteref-1550" epub:type="noteref">1550</a> to shew his wonderful mirácle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In her, that we should see his mighty workës:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Christ, which that is to every harm triácle,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1551" id="noteref-1551" epub:type="noteref">1551</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>By certain meanës oft, as knowë clerkës,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1552" id="noteref-1552" epub:type="noteref">1552</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth thing for certain endë, that full derk is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mannë’s wit, that for our, ignorance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne cannot know his prudent purveyance.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1553" id="noteref-1553" epub:type="noteref">1553</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now since she was not at the feast y-slaw,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1554" id="noteref-1554" epub:type="noteref">1554</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who keptë her from drowning in the sea?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who keptë Jonas in the fish’s maw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till he was spouted up at Nineveh?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well may men know, it was no wight but he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That kept the Hebrew people from drowníng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With dryë feet throughout the sea passing.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who bade the fourë spirits of tempést,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1555" id="noteref-1555" epub:type="noteref">1555</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That power have t’ annoyë land and sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both north and south, and also west and east,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Annoyë neither sea, nor land, nor tree?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soothly the cómmander of that was he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That from the tempest aye this woman kept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As well when she awoke as when she slept.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Where might this woman meat and drinkë have?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three year and more how lasted her vitaille?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1556" id="noteref-1556" epub:type="noteref">1556</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who fed the Egyptian Mary in the cave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or in desért? no wight but Christ <i xml:lang="fr">sans faille</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1557" id="noteref-1557" epub:type="noteref">1557</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Five thousand folk it was as great marvaille</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With loavës five and fishës two to feed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God sent his foison<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1558" id="noteref-1558" epub:type="noteref">1558</a> at her greatë need.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She drived forth into our oceán</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throughout our wildë sea, till at the last</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under an hold,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1559" id="noteref-1559" epub:type="noteref">1559</a> that nempnen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1560" id="noteref-1560" epub:type="noteref">1560</a> I not can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far in Northumberland, the wave her cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the sand her ship sticked so fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thennës would it not in all a tide:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1561" id="noteref-1561" epub:type="noteref">1561</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The will of Christ was that she should abide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Constable of the castle down did fare<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1562" id="noteref-1562" epub:type="noteref">1562</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see this wreck, and all the ship he sought,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1563" id="noteref-1563" epub:type="noteref">1563</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And found this weary woman full of care;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He found also the treasure that she brought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In her languágë mercy she besought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The life out of her body for to twin,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1564" id="noteref-1564" epub:type="noteref">1564</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her to deliver of woe that she was in.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A manner Latin corrupt<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1565" id="noteref-1565" epub:type="noteref">1565</a> was her speech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But algate<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1566" id="noteref-1566" epub:type="noteref">1566</a> thereby was she understond.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Constable, when him list no longer seech,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1567" id="noteref-1567" epub:type="noteref">1567</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>This woeful woman brought he to the lond.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She kneeled down, and thanked Goddë’s sond;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1568" id="noteref-1568" epub:type="noteref">1568</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what she was she would to no man say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For foul nor fair, although that she should dey.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1569" id="noteref-1569" epub:type="noteref">1569</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She said, she was so mazed in the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she forgot her mindë, by her truth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Constable had of her so great pity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke his wifë, that they wept for ruth:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1570" id="noteref-1570" epub:type="noteref">1570</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was so diligent withoutë slouth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To serve and please every one in that place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all her lov’d, that looked in her face.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Constable and Dame Hermegild his wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were Pagans, and that country every where;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Hermegild lov’d Constance as her life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Constance had so long sojourned there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In orisons, with many a bitter tear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till Jesus had converted through His grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dame Hermegild, Constábless of that place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In all that land no Christians durstë rout;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1571" id="noteref-1571" epub:type="noteref">1571</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>All Christian folk had fled from that countrý</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through Pagans, that conquered all about</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The plages<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1572" id="noteref-1572" epub:type="noteref">1572</a> of the North by land and sea.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Wales had fled the Christianity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of oldë Britons,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1573" id="noteref-1573" epub:type="noteref">1573</a> dwelling in this isle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was their refuge for the meanëwhile.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But yet n’ere<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1574" id="noteref-1574" epub:type="noteref">1574</a> Christian Britons so exiled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That there n’ere<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1575" id="noteref-1575" epub:type="noteref">1575</a> some which in their privity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Honoured Christ, and heathen folk beguiled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nigh the castle such there dwelled three:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one of them was blind, and might not see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1576" id="noteref-1576" epub:type="noteref">1576</a> it were with thilk<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1577" id="noteref-1577" epub:type="noteref">1577</a> eyen of his mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which men mayë see when they be blind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Bright was the sun, as in a summer’s day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which the Constable, and his wife also,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Constance, have y-take the rightë way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toward the sea, a furlong way or two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To playen, and to roamë to and fro;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in their walk this blindë man they met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crooked and old, with eyen fast y-shet.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1578" id="noteref-1578" epub:type="noteref">1578</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“In the name of Christ,” criéd this blind Britón,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Dame Hermegild, give me my sight again!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This lady wax’d afrayed of that soun’,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1579" id="noteref-1579" epub:type="noteref">1579</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest that her husband, shortly for to sayn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would her for Jesus Christë’s love have slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till Constance made her hold, and bade her wirch<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1580" id="noteref-1580" epub:type="noteref">1580</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The will of Christ, as daughter of holy Church.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Constable wax’d abashed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1581" id="noteref-1581" epub:type="noteref">1581</a> of that sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saidë; “What amounteth all this fare?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1582" id="noteref-1582" epub:type="noteref">1582</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Constance answered; “Sir, it is Christ’s might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That helpeth folk out of the fiendë’s snare:”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so farforth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1583" id="noteref-1583" epub:type="noteref">1583</a> she gan our law declare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she the Constable, ere that it were eve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Converted, and on Christ made him believe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This Constable was not lord of the place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which I speak, there as he Constance fand,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1584" id="noteref-1584" epub:type="noteref">1584</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But kept it strongly many a winter space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under Allá, king of Northumberland,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was full wise, and worthy of his hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the Scotës, as men may well hear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But turn I will again to my mattére.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Satan, that ever us waiteth to beguile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saw of Constance all her perfectioún,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cast<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1585" id="noteref-1585" epub:type="noteref">1585</a> anon how he might quite her while;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1586" id="noteref-1586" epub:type="noteref">1586</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made a young knight, that dwelt in that town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love her so hot of foul affectioún,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That verily him thought that he should spill<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1587" id="noteref-1587" epub:type="noteref">1587</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1588" id="noteref-1588" epub:type="noteref">1588</a> he of her might onës have his will.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He wooed her, but it availed nought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She wouldë do no sinnë by no way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for despite, he compassed his thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To makë her a shameful death to dey;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1589" id="noteref-1589" epub:type="noteref">1589</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He waiteth when the Constable is away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And privily upon a night he crept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Hermegilda’s chamber while she slept.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Weary, forwaked<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1590" id="noteref-1590" epub:type="noteref">1590</a> in her orisons,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sleepeth Constance, and Hermegild also.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This knight, through Satanas’ temptatións,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All softëtly is to the bed y-go,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1591" id="noteref-1591" epub:type="noteref">1591</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cut the throat of Hermegild in two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And laid the bloody knife by Dame Constance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And went his way, there God give him mischance.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soon after came the Constable home again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke Allá that king was of that land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saw his wife dispiteously<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1592" id="noteref-1592" epub:type="noteref">1592</a> slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which full oft he wept and wrung his hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the bed the bloody knife he fand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Dame Constance: Alas! what might she say?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For very woe her wit was all away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To King Allá was told all this mischance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke the time, and where, and in what wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in a ship was founden this Constance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As here before ye have me heard devise:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1593" id="noteref-1593" epub:type="noteref">1593</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The kingë’s heart for pity gan agrise,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1594" id="noteref-1594" epub:type="noteref">1594</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he saw so benign a creature</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fall in disease<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1595" id="noteref-1595" epub:type="noteref">1595</a> and in misáventure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For as the lamb toward his death is brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So stood this innocent before the king:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This falsë knight, that had this treason wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bore her in hand<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1596" id="noteref-1596" epub:type="noteref">1596</a> that she had done this thing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But natheless there was great murmuring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the people, that say they cannot guess</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she had done so great a wickedness.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For they had seen her ever virtuoús,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And loving Hermegild right as her life:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this bare witness each one in that house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save he that Hermegild slew with his knife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This gentle king had caught a great motife<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1597" id="noteref-1597" epub:type="noteref">1597</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this witness, and thought he would inquere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deeper into this case, the truth to lear.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1598" id="noteref-1598" epub:type="noteref">1598</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Alas! Constance, thou has no champión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor fightë canst thou not, so well-away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he that starf<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1599" id="noteref-1599" epub:type="noteref">1599</a> for our redemptión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bound Satán, and yet li’th where he lay,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1600" id="noteref-1600" epub:type="noteref">1600</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>So be thy strongë champion this day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, but Christ upon thee mirácle kithe,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1601" id="noteref-1601" epub:type="noteref">1601</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Withoutë guilt thou shalt be slain as swithe.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1602" id="noteref-1602" epub:type="noteref">1602</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She set her down on knees, and thus she said;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Immortal God, that savedest Susanne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From falsë blame; and thou merciful maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mary I mean, the daughter to Saint Anne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before whose child the angels sing Osanne,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1603" id="noteref-1603" epub:type="noteref">1603</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I be guiltless of this felony,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1604" id="noteref-1604" epub:type="noteref">1604</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>My succour be, or ellës shall I die.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Have ye not seen sometime a palë face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Among a press) of him that hath been lad<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1605" id="noteref-1605" epub:type="noteref">1605</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toward his death, where he getteth no grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And such a colour in his face hath had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men mightë know him that was so bestad<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1606" id="noteref-1606" epub:type="noteref">1606</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amongës all the faces in that rout?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So stood Constance, and looked her about.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O queenës living in prosperity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Duchesses, and ye ladies every one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Havë some ruth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1607" id="noteref-1607" epub:type="noteref">1607</a> on her adversity!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An emperor’s daughtér, she stood alone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She had no wight to whom to make her moan.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O blood royál, that standest in this drede,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1608" id="noteref-1608" epub:type="noteref">1608</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far be thy friendës in thy greatë need!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This king Allá had such compassióun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As gentle heart is full filled of pitý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That from his eyen ran the water down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now hastily do fetch a book,” quoth he;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“And if this knight will swearë, how that she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This woman slew, yet will we us advise<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1609" id="noteref-1609" epub:type="noteref">1609</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom that we will that shall be our justíce.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1610" id="noteref-1610" epub:type="noteref">1610</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A Briton book, written with Evangiles,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1611" id="noteref-1611" epub:type="noteref">1611</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was fetched, and on this book he swore anon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She guilty was; and, in the meanëwhiles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An hand him smote upon the neckë bone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That down he fell at once right as a stone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And both his eyen burst out of his face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sight of ev’rybody in that place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A voice was heard, in general audience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That said; “Thou hast deslander’d guiltëless</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The daughter of holy Church in high presence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus hast thou done, and yet hold I my peace?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1612" id="noteref-1612" epub:type="noteref">1612</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this marvel aghast was all the press,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As mazed folk they stood every one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For dread of wreakë,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1613" id="noteref-1613" epub:type="noteref">1613</a> save Constance alone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great was the dread and eke the repentánce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of them that haddë wrong suspición</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon this sely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1614" id="noteref-1614" epub:type="noteref">1614</a> innocent Constance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for this miracle, in conclusión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by Constance’s mediatión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The king, and many another in that place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Converted was, thanked be Christë’s grace!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This falsë knight was slain for his untruth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By judgëment of Alla hastily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet Constance had of his death great ruth;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1615" id="noteref-1615" epub:type="noteref">1615</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after this Jesus of his mercý</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made Alla weddë full solemnëly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This holy woman, that is so bright and sheen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus hath Christ y-made Constance a queen.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But who was woeful, if I shall not lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this wedding but Donegild, and no mo’,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The kingë’s mother, full of tyranny?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her thought her cursed heart would burst in two;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She would not that her son had donë so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her thought it a despite that he should take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So strange a creature unto his make.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1616" id="noteref-1616" epub:type="noteref">1616</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Me list not of the chaff nor of the stre<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1617" id="noteref-1617" epub:type="noteref">1617</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make so long a tale, as of the corn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What should I tellen of the royalty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this marriáge, or which course goes beforn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who bloweth in a trump or in an horn?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fruit of every tale is for to say;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They eat and drink, and dance, and sing, and play.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They go to bed, as it was skill<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1618" id="noteref-1618" epub:type="noteref">1618</a> and right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For though that wivës be full holy things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They mustë take in patience at night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such manner<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1619" id="noteref-1619" epub:type="noteref">1619</a> necessaries as be pleasings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To folk that have y-wedded them with rings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lay a lite<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1620" id="noteref-1620" epub:type="noteref">1620</a> their holiness aside</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As for the time, it may no better betide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>On her he got a knavë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1621" id="noteref-1621" epub:type="noteref">1621</a> child anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to a Bishop and to his Constable eke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He took his wife to keep, when he is gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Scotland-ward, his foemen for to seek.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now fair Constance, that is so humble and meek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So long is gone with childë till that still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She held her chamb’r, abiding Christë’s will</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The time is come, a knavë child she bare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mauricius at the font-stone they him call.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Constable doth forth come<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1622" id="noteref-1622" epub:type="noteref">1622</a> a messenger,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wrote unto his king that clep’d was All’,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How that this blissful tiding is befall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And other tidings speedful for to say.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1623" id="noteref-1623" epub:type="noteref">1623</a> hath the letter, and forth he go’th his way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This messenger, to do his ávantage,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1624" id="noteref-1624" epub:type="noteref">1624</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the kingë’s mother rideth swithe,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1625" id="noteref-1625" epub:type="noteref">1625</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saluteth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1626" id="noteref-1626" epub:type="noteref">1626</a> her full fair in his languáge.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Madame,” quoth he, “ye may be glad and blithe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thankë God an hundred thousand sithe;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1627" id="noteref-1627" epub:type="noteref">1627</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>My lady queen hath child, withoutë doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To joy and bliss of all this realm about.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Lo, here the letter sealed of this thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I must bear with all the haste I may:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If ye will aught unto your son the king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am your servant both by night and day.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Donegild answér’d, “As now at this time, nay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But here I will all night thou take thy rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-morrow will I say thee what me lest.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1628" id="noteref-1628" epub:type="noteref">1628</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This messenger drank sadly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1629" id="noteref-1629" epub:type="noteref">1629</a> ale and wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stolen were his letters privily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of his box, while he slept as a swine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And counterfeited was full subtilly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another letter, wrote full sinfully,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the king, direct of this mattére</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From his Constable, as ye shall after hear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This letter said, the queen deliver’d was</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of so horrible a fiendlike creatúre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in the castle none so hardy<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1630" id="noteref-1630" epub:type="noteref">1630</a> was</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That any while he durst therein endure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mother was an elf by áventure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Become,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1631" id="noteref-1631" epub:type="noteref">1631</a> by charmës or by sorcery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every man hated her company.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Woe was this king when he this letter had seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to no wight he told his sorrows sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with his owen hand he wrote again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Welcome the sond<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1632" id="noteref-1632" epub:type="noteref">1632</a> of Christ for evermore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me, that am now learned in this lore:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1633" id="noteref-1633" epub:type="noteref">1633</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lord, welcome be thy lust<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1634" id="noteref-1634" epub:type="noteref">1634</a> and thy pleasance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My lust I put all in thine ordinance.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Keepë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1635" id="noteref-1635" epub:type="noteref">1635</a> this child, all be it foul or fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke my wife, unto mine homecoming:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Christ when him list may send to me an heir,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More agreeáble than this to my liking.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This letter he sealed, privily weeping.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which to the messenger was taken soon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And forth he went, there is no more to do’n.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1636" id="noteref-1636" epub:type="noteref">1636</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span id="the-man-of-laws-tale-line-771">O messenger full fill’d of drunkenness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strong is thy breath, thy limbës falter aye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou betrayest allë secretness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy mind is lorn,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1637" id="noteref-1637" epub:type="noteref">1637</a> thou janglest as a jay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy face is turned in a new array;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1638" id="noteref-1638" epub:type="noteref">1638</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where drunkenness reigneth in any rout,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1639" id="noteref-1639" epub:type="noteref">1639</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no counsel hid, withoutë doubt.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O Donegild, I have no English dign<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1640" id="noteref-1640" epub:type="noteref">1640</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto thy malice, and thy tyranny:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore to the fiend I thee resign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let him indite of all thy treachery.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fy, mannish,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1641" id="noteref-1641" epub:type="noteref">1641</a> fy! O nay, by God I lie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fy, fiendlike spirit! for I dare well tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though thou here walk, thy spirit is in hell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This messenger came from the king again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the kingë’s mother’s court he light,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1642" id="noteref-1642" epub:type="noteref">1642</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she was of this messenger full fain,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1643" id="noteref-1643" epub:type="noteref">1643</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pleased him in all that e’er she might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He drank, and well his girdle underpight;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1644" id="noteref-1644" epub:type="noteref">1644</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He slept, and eke he snored in his guise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All night, until the sun began to rise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Eft<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1645" id="noteref-1645" epub:type="noteref">1645</a> were his letters stolen every one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And counterfeited letters in this wise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The king commanded his Constable anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On pain of hanging and of high jewíse,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1646" id="noteref-1646" epub:type="noteref">1646</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he should suffer in no manner wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Constance within his regne<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1647" id="noteref-1647" epub:type="noteref">1647</a> for to abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three dayës, and a quarter of a tide;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1648" id="noteref-1648" epub:type="noteref">1648</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But in the samë ship as he her fand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her and her youngë son, and all her gear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shouldë put, and crowd<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1649" id="noteref-1649" epub:type="noteref">1649</a> her from the land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And charge her, that she never eft come there.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O my Constance, well may thy ghost<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1650" id="noteref-1650" epub:type="noteref">1650</a> have fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sleeping in thy dream be in penánce,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1651" id="noteref-1651" epub:type="noteref">1651</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Donegild cast<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1652" id="noteref-1652" epub:type="noteref">1652</a> all this ordinance.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1653" id="noteref-1653" epub:type="noteref">1653</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This messenger, on morrow when he woke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the castle held the nextë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1654" id="noteref-1654" epub:type="noteref">1654</a> way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the constable the letter took;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when he this dispiteous<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1655" id="noteref-1655" epub:type="noteref">1655</a> letter sey,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1656" id="noteref-1656" epub:type="noteref">1656</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full oft he said, “Alas, and well-away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lord Christ,” quoth he, “how may this world endure?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So full of sin is many a creature.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O mighty God, if that it be thy will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since thou art rightful judge, how may it be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou wilt suffer innocence to spill,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1657" id="noteref-1657" epub:type="noteref">1657</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wicked folk reign in prosperity?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! good Constance, alas! so woe is me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I must be thy tormentor, or dey<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1658" id="noteref-1658" epub:type="noteref">1658</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shameful death, there is no other way.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wept bothë young and old in all that place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that the king this cursed letter sent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Constance, with a deadly palë face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fourthë day toward her ship she went:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But natheless she took in good intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The will of Christ, and kneeling on the strond<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1659" id="noteref-1659" epub:type="noteref">1659</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>She saidë, “Lord, aye welcome be thy sond.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1660" id="noteref-1660" epub:type="noteref">1660</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“He that me keptë from the falsë blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While I was in the land amongës you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He can me keep from harm and eke from shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the salt sea, although I see not how:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As strong as ever he was, he is yet now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In him trust I, and in his mother dear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is to me my sail and eke my stere.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1661" id="noteref-1661" epub:type="noteref">1661</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her little child lay weeping in her arm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, kneeling, piteously to him she said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Peace, little son, I will do thee no harm:”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With that her kerchief off her head she braid,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1662" id="noteref-1662" epub:type="noteref">1662</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And over his little eyen she it laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in her arm she lulled it full fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And unto heav’n her eyen up she cast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Mother,” quoth she, “and maiden bright, Marý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sooth is, that through a woman’s eggement<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1663" id="noteref-1663" epub:type="noteref">1663</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mankind was lorn,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1664" id="noteref-1664" epub:type="noteref">1664</a> and damned aye to die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which thy child was on a cross y-rent:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1665" id="noteref-1665" epub:type="noteref">1665</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy blissful eyen saw all his torment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then is there no comparison between</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy woe, and any woe man may sustene.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thou saw’st thy child y-slain before thine eyen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet now lives my little child, parfay:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1666" id="noteref-1666" epub:type="noteref">1666</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, lady bright, to whom the woeful cryen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou glory of womanhood, thou fairë may,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1667" id="noteref-1667" epub:type="noteref">1667</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou haven of refuge, bright star of day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rue<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1668" id="noteref-1668" epub:type="noteref">1668</a> on my child, that of thy gentleness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ruest on every rueful<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1669" id="noteref-1669" epub:type="noteref">1669</a> in distress.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O little child, alas! what is thy guilt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That never wroughtest sin as yet, pardie?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1670" id="noteref-1670" epub:type="noteref">1670</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why will thine hardë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1671" id="noteref-1671" epub:type="noteref">1671</a> father have thee spilt?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1672" id="noteref-1672" epub:type="noteref">1672</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>O mercy, dearë Constable,” quoth she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“And let my little child here dwell with thee:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if thou dar’st not save him from blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So kiss him onës in his father’s name.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Therewith she looked backward to the land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saidë, “Farewell, husband ruthëless!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1673" id="noteref-1673" epub:type="noteref">1673</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And up she rose, and walked down the strand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toward the ship, her following all the press:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1674" id="noteref-1674" epub:type="noteref">1674</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever she pray’d her child to hold his peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And took her leave, and with an holy intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She blessed her, and to the ship she went.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Victualed was the ship, it is no drede,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1675" id="noteref-1675" epub:type="noteref">1675</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abundantly for her a full long space:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And other necessaries that should need<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1676" id="noteref-1676" epub:type="noteref">1676</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>She had enough, heried<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1677" id="noteref-1677" epub:type="noteref">1677</a> be Goddë’s grace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For wind and weather, Almighty God purchase,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1678" id="noteref-1678" epub:type="noteref">1678</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bring her home; I can no better say;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in the sea she drived forth her way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Allá the king came home soon after this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the castle, of the which I told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And asked where his wife and his child is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Constable gan about his heart feel cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And plainly all the matter he him told</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ye have heard; I can tell it no better;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shew’d the king his seal, and eke his letter</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And saidë; “Lord, as ye commanded me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On pain of death, so have I done certáin.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The messenger tormented<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1679" id="noteref-1679" epub:type="noteref">1679</a> was, till he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mustë beknow,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1680" id="noteref-1680" epub:type="noteref">1680</a> and tell it flat and plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From night to night in what place he had lain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus, by wit and subtle inquiring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Imagin’d was by whom this harm gan spring.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The hand was known that had the letter wrote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the venom of the cursed deed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in what wise, certáinly I know nót.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ effect is this, that Alla, out of drede,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1681" id="noteref-1681" epub:type="noteref">1681</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>His mother slew, that may men plainly read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that she traitor was to her liegeánce:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1682" id="noteref-1682" epub:type="noteref">1682</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus ended oldë Donegild with mischance.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The sorrow that this Alla night and day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made for his wife, and for his child also,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no tonguë that it tellë may.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now will I again to Constance go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That floated in the sea in pain and woe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Five year and more, as liked Christë’s sond,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1683" id="noteref-1683" epub:type="noteref">1683</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere that her ship approached to the lond.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1684" id="noteref-1684" epub:type="noteref">1684</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Under an heathen castle, at the last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which the name in my text I not find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Constance and eke her child the sea upcast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Almighty God, that saved all mankind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have on Constance and on her child some mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fallen is in heathen hand eftsoon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1685" id="noteref-1685" epub:type="noteref">1685</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>In point to spill,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1686" id="noteref-1686" epub:type="noteref">1686</a> as I shall tell you soon!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Down from the castle came there many a wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To gauren<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1687" id="noteref-1687" epub:type="noteref">1687</a> on this ship, and on Constance:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But shortly from the castle, on a night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lordë’s steward⁠—God give him mischance⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thief that had renied our creance,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1688" id="noteref-1688" epub:type="noteref">1688</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came to the ship alone, and said he would</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her leman<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1689" id="noteref-1689" epub:type="noteref">1689</a> be, whether she would or n’ould.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1690" id="noteref-1690" epub:type="noteref">1690</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Woe was this wretched woman then begone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her child cri’d, and she cried piteously:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But blissful Mary help’d her right anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, with her struggling well and mightily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thief fell overboard all suddenly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the sea he drenched<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1691" id="noteref-1691" epub:type="noteref">1691</a> for vengeánce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus hath Christ unwemmed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1692" id="noteref-1692" epub:type="noteref">1692</a> kept Constánce.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O foul lust of luxúry! lo thine end!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not only that thou faintest<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1693" id="noteref-1693" epub:type="noteref">1693</a> mannë’s mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But verily thou wilt his body shend.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1694" id="noteref-1694" epub:type="noteref">1694</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ end of thy work, or of thy lustës blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is cómplaining: how many may men find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That not for work, sometimes, but for th’ intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To do this sin, be either slain or shent?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>How may this weakë woman have the strength</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her to defend against this renegate?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Góliath, unmeasurable of length,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How mightë David makë thee so mate?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1695" id="noteref-1695" epub:type="noteref">1695</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>So young, and of armoúr so desolate,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1696" id="noteref-1696" epub:type="noteref">1696</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>How durst he look upon thy dreadful face?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well may men see it was but Goddë’s grace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who gave Judith couráge or hardiness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To slay him, Holofernes, in his tent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to deliver out of wretchedness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The people of God? I say for this intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That right as God spirit of vigour sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To them, and saved them out of mischance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So sent he might and vigour to Constance.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Forth went her ship throughout the narrow mouth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Jubaltare and Septe,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1697" id="noteref-1697" epub:type="noteref">1697</a> driving alway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimë west, and sometime north and south,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sometime east, full many a weary day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till Christë’s mother (blessed be she aye)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had shapen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1698" id="noteref-1698" epub:type="noteref">1698</a> through her endëless goodness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make an end of all her heaviness.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now let us stint of Constance but a throw,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1699" id="noteref-1699" epub:type="noteref">1699</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And speak we of the Roman emperor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That out of Syria had by letters know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The slaughter of Christian folk, and dishonór</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Done to his daughter by a false traitór⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I mean the cursed wicked Soudaness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That at the feast let<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1700" id="noteref-1700" epub:type="noteref">1700</a> slay both more and less.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For which this emperor had sent anon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His senator, with royal ordinance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And other lordës, God wot, many a one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Syrians to takë high vengeánce:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They burn and slay, and bring them to mischance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full many a day: but shortly this is th’ end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Homeward to Rome they shaped them to wend.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This senator repaired with victóry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Romë-ward, sailing full royally,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And met the ship driving, as saith the story,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which Constancë sat full piteously:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nothing knew he what she was, nor why</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was in such array; nor she will say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of her estate, although that she should dey.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1701" id="noteref-1701" epub:type="noteref">1701</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He brought her unto Rome, and to his wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He gave her, and her youngë son also:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with the senator she led her life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus can our Lady bringen out of woe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Woeful Constance, and many another mo’:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And longë time she dwelled in that place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In holy works ever, as was her grace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The senatorë’s wife her auntë was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for all that she knew her ne’er the more:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will no longer tarry in this case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to King Alla, whom I spake of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That for his wifë wept and sighed sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will return, and leave I will Constance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the senatorë’s governance.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>King Alla, which that had his mother slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a day fell in such repentánce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, if I shortly tell it shall and plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Rome he came to receive his penitánce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And put him in the Popë’s ordinance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In high and low, and Jesus Christ besought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgive his wicked works that he had wrought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The fame anon throughout the town is borne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How Alla king shall come on pilgrimage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By harbingers that wentë him beforn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which the senator, as was uságe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rode him again,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1702" id="noteref-1702" epub:type="noteref">1702</a> and many of his lineáge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As well to show his high magnificence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As to do any king a reverence.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great cheerë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1703" id="noteref-1703" epub:type="noteref">1703</a> did this noble senator</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To King Allá and he to him also;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each of them did the other great honór;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so befell, that in a day or two</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This senator did to King Alla go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To feast, and shortly, if I shall not lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Constance’s son went in his company.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Some men would say,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1704" id="noteref-1704" epub:type="noteref">1704</a> at réquest of Constance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This senator had led this child to feast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I may not tellen every circumstance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be as be may, there was he at the least:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But sooth is this, that at his mother’s hest<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1705" id="noteref-1705" epub:type="noteref">1705</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before Allá, during the meatë’s space,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1706" id="noteref-1706" epub:type="noteref">1706</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The child stood, looking in the kingë’s face.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This Alla king had of this child great wonder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the senator he said anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Whose is that fairë child that standeth yonder?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I n’ot,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1707" id="noteref-1707" epub:type="noteref">1707</a> quoth he, “by God and by Saint John;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mother he hath, but father hath he none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I of wot:” and shortly in a stound<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1708" id="noteref-1708" epub:type="noteref">1708</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He told to Alla how this child was found.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But God wot,” quoth this senator also,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“So virtuous a liver in all my life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I never saw, as she, nor heard of mo’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of worldly woman, maiden, widow or wife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I dare well say she haddë lever<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1709" id="noteref-1709" epub:type="noteref">1709</a> a knife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Throughout her breast, than be a woman wick’,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1710" id="noteref-1710" epub:type="noteref">1710</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no man could bring her to that prick.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1711" id="noteref-1711" epub:type="noteref">1711</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now was this child as like unto Constance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As possible is a creature to be:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Alla had the face in remembránce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Dame Constance, and thereon mused he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that the childë’s mother were aught she<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1712" id="noteref-1712" epub:type="noteref">1712</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was his wife; and privily he sight,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1713" id="noteref-1713" epub:type="noteref">1713</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sped him from the table that he might.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1714" id="noteref-1714" epub:type="noteref">1714</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Parfay,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1715" id="noteref-1715" epub:type="noteref">1715</a> thought he, “phantom<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1716" id="noteref-1716" epub:type="noteref">1716</a> is in mine head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I ought to deem, of skilful judgëment,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1717" id="noteref-1717" epub:type="noteref">1717</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in the saltë sea my wife is dead.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And afterward he made his argument,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What wot I, if that Christ have hither sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My wife by sea, as well as he her sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To my country, from thennës that she went?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And, after noon, home with the senator</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went Alla, for to see this wondrous chance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This senator did Alla great honór,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hastily he sent after Constance:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But trustë well, her listë not to dance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that she wistë wherefore was that sond,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1718" id="noteref-1718" epub:type="noteref">1718</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unneth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1719" id="noteref-1719" epub:type="noteref">1719</a> upon her feet she mightë stand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When Alla saw his wife, fair he her gret,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1720" id="noteref-1720" epub:type="noteref">1720</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wept, that it was ruthë for to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For at the firstë look he on her set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He knew well verily that it was she:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she, for sorrow, as dumb stood as a tree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So was her heartë shut in her distress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When she remember’d his unkindëness.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Twicë she swooned in his owen sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wept and him excused piteously:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now God,” quoth he, “and all his hallows<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1721" id="noteref-1721" epub:type="noteref">1721</a> bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So wisly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1722" id="noteref-1722" epub:type="noteref">1722</a> on my soulë have mercý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of your harm as guiltëless am I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As is Mauríce my son, so like your face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Else may the fiend me fetch out of this place.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Long was the sobbing and the bitter pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere that their woeful heartës mightë cease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great was the pity for to hear them plain,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1723" id="noteref-1723" epub:type="noteref">1723</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through whichë plaintës gan their woe increase.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray you all my labour to release,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I may not tell all their woe till to-morrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am so weary for to speak of sorrow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But finally, when that the sooth is wist,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1724" id="noteref-1724" epub:type="noteref">1724</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Alla guiltless was of all her woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I trow an hundred timës have they kiss’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And such a bliss is there betwixt them two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, save the joy that lasteth evermo’,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is none like, that any creatúre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath seen, or shall see, while the world may dure.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then prayed she her husband meekëly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the relief of her long piteous pine,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1725" id="noteref-1725" epub:type="noteref">1725</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he would pray her father specially,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of his majesty he would incline</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To vouchësafe some day with him to dine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She pray’d him eke, that he should by no way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto her father no word of her say.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Some men would say, how that the child Mauríce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did this messáge unto the emperor:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, as I guess, Alla was not so nice,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1726" id="noteref-1726" epub:type="noteref">1726</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To him that is so sovereign of honór</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he that is of Christian folk the flow’r,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Send any child, but better ’tis to deem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He went himself; and so it may well seem.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This emperor hath granted gentilly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To come to dinner, as he him besought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And well rede<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1727" id="noteref-1727" epub:type="noteref">1727</a> I, he looked busily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon this child, and on his daughter thought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alla went to his inn, and as him ought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arrayed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1728" id="noteref-1728" epub:type="noteref">1728</a> for this feast in every wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As farforth as his cunning<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1729" id="noteref-1729" epub:type="noteref">1729</a> may suffice.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The morrow came, and Alla gan him dress,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1730" id="noteref-1730" epub:type="noteref">1730</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke his wife, the emperor to meet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And forth they rode in joy and in gladness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when she saw her father in the street,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She lighted down and fell before his feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Father,” quoth she, “your youngë child Constance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is now full clean out of your rémembránce.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“I am your daughter, your Constance,” quoth she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“That whilom ye have sent into Syrie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It am I, father, that in the salt sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was put alone, and damned<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1731" id="noteref-1731" epub:type="noteref">1731</a> for to die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, goodë father, I you mercy cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Send me no more into none heatheness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thank my lord here of his kindëness.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who can the piteous joyë tellen all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betwixt them three, since they be thus y-met?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But of my talë make an end I shall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The day goes fast, I will no longer let.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1732" id="noteref-1732" epub:type="noteref">1732</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>These gladdë folk to dinner be y-set;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In joy and bliss at meat I let them dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand fold well more than I can tell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This child Maurice was since then emperór</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made by the Pope, and lived Christianly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Christë’s Churchë did he great honór:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I let all his story passë by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Constance is my tale especially,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the oldë Roman gestës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1733" id="noteref-1733" epub:type="noteref">1733</a> men may find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mauríce’s life, I bear it not in mind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This King Alla, when he his timë sey,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1734" id="noteref-1734" epub:type="noteref">1734</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his Constance, his holy wife so sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To England are they come the rightë way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where they did live in joy and in quiét.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But little while it lasted, I you hete,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1735" id="noteref-1735" epub:type="noteref">1735</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Joy of this world for time will not abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From day to night it changeth as the tide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who liv’d ever in such delight one day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That him not moved either conscience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ire, or talent, or some kind affray,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1736" id="noteref-1736" epub:type="noteref">1736</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Envy, or pride, or passion, or offence?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say but for this endë this senténce,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1737" id="noteref-1737" epub:type="noteref">1737</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That little while in joy or in pleasance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lasted the bliss of Alla with Constance.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For death, that takes of high and low his rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When passed was a year, even as I guess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of this world this King Alla he hent,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1738" id="noteref-1738" epub:type="noteref">1738</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For whom Constance had full great heaviness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now let us pray that God his soulë bless:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Dame Constancë, finally to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toward the town of Romë went her way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To Rome is come this holy creature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And findeth there her friendës whole and sound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now is she scaped all her áventure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when that she her father hath y-found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down on her kneës falleth she to ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weeping for tenderness in heartë blithe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She herieth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1739" id="noteref-1739" epub:type="noteref">1739</a> God an hundred thousand sithe.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1740" id="noteref-1740" epub:type="noteref">1740</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In virtue and in holy almës-deed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They liven all, and ne’er asunder wend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till death departeth them, this life they lead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fare now well, my tale is at an end.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now Jesus Christ, that of his might may send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Joy after woe, govérn us in his grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And keep us allë that be in this place.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
