<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Friar’s Tale</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-friars-tale" epub:type="division z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Friar’s Tale</h2>
			<section id="the-friars-tale-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Prologue<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2139" id="noteref-2139" epub:type="noteref">2139</a></h3>
				<p>
					<span>This worthy limitour, this noble Frere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He made always a manner louring cheer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2140" id="noteref-2140" epub:type="noteref">2140</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the Sompnour; but for honesty<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2141" id="noteref-2141" epub:type="noteref">2141</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>No villain word as yet to him spake he:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But at the last he said unto the Wife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Damë,” quoth he, “God give you right good life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye have here touched, all so may I thé,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2142" id="noteref-2142" epub:type="noteref">2142</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>In school matter a greatë difficulty.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye have said muchë thing right well, I say;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, Damë, here as we ride by the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Us needeth not but for to speak of game,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And leave authorities, in Goddë’s name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To preaching, and to school eke of clergy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if it like unto this company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will you of a Sompnour tell a game;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pardie, ye may well knowë by the name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of a Sompnour may no good be said;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray that none of you be evil paid;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2143" id="noteref-2143" epub:type="noteref">2143</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Sompnour is a runner up and down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With mandements<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2144" id="noteref-2144" epub:type="noteref">2144</a> for fornicatioún,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And is y-beat at every townë’s end.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then spake our Host; “Ah, sir, ye should be hend<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2145" id="noteref-2145" epub:type="noteref">2145</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And courteous, as a man of your estate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In company we will have no debate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell us your tale, and let the Sompnour be.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nay,” quoth the Sompnour, “let him say by me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What so him list; when it comes to my lot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By God, I shall him quiten<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2146" id="noteref-2146" epub:type="noteref">2146</a> every groat!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall him tellë what a great honoúr</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is to be a flattering limitour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his offíce I shall him tell y-wis.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2147" id="noteref-2147" epub:type="noteref">2147</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our Host answered, “Peace, no more of this.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And afterward he said unto the frere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Tell forth your tale, mine owen master dear.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-friars-tale-main" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Tale</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Whilom<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2148" id="noteref-2148" epub:type="noteref">2148</a> there was dwelling in my countrý</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An archdeacon, a man of high degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That boldëly did executión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In punishing of fornicatión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of witchëcraft, and eke of bawdery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of defamation, and adultery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of churchë-reevës,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2149" id="noteref-2149" epub:type="noteref">2149</a> and of testaments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of contracts, and of lack of sacraments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke of many another manner<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2150" id="noteref-2150" epub:type="noteref">2150</a> crime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which needeth not rehearsen at this time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of usury, and simony also;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, certes, lechours did he greatest woe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They shouldë singen, if that they were hent;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2151" id="noteref-2151" epub:type="noteref">2151</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And smallë tithers<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2152" id="noteref-2152" epub:type="noteref">2152</a> werë foul y-shent,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2153" id="noteref-2153" epub:type="noteref">2153</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>If any person would on them complain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There might astert them no pecunial pain.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2154" id="noteref-2154" epub:type="noteref">2154</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For smallë tithës, and small offering,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He made the people piteously to sing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ere the bishop caught them with his crook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They weren in the archëdeacon’s book;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then had he, through his jurisdictión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Power to do on them correctión.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He had a Sompnour ready to his hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A slier boy was none in Engleland;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For subtlely he had his espiaille,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2155" id="noteref-2155" epub:type="noteref">2155</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That taught him well where it might aught avail.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He couldë spare of lechours one or two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To teachë him to four and twenty mo’.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For⁠—though this Sompnour wood<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2156" id="noteref-2156" epub:type="noteref">2156</a> be as a hare⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tell his harlotry I will not spare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For we be out of their correctión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They have of us no jurisdictión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne never shall have, term of all their lives.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Peter; so be the women of the stives,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2157" id="noteref-2157" epub:type="noteref">2157</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quoth this Sompnour, “y-put out of our cure.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2158" id="noteref-2158" epub:type="noteref">2158</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Peace, with mischance and with misáventure,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our Hostë said, “and let him tell his tale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now tellë forth, and let the Sompnour gale,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2159" id="noteref-2159" epub:type="noteref">2159</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor sparë not, mine owen master dear.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This falsë thief, the Sompnour (quoth the Frere),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had always bawdës ready to his hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As any hawk to lure in Engleland,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That told him all the secrets that they knew⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For their acquaintance was not come of new;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They were his approvers<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2160" id="noteref-2160" epub:type="noteref">2160</a> privily.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He took himself at great profit thereby:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His master knew not always what he wan.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2161" id="noteref-2161" epub:type="noteref">2161</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Withoutë mandement, a lewëd<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2162" id="noteref-2162" epub:type="noteref">2162</a> man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He could summon, on pain of Christë’s curse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they were inly glad to fill his purse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make him greatë feastës at the nale.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2163" id="noteref-2163" epub:type="noteref">2163</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And right as Judas haddë purses smale,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2164" id="noteref-2164" epub:type="noteref">2164</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And was a thief, right such a thief was he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His master had but half his duëty.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2165" id="noteref-2165" epub:type="noteref">2165</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was (if I shall givë him his laud)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thief, and eke a Sompnour, and a bawd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he had wenches at his retinue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That whether that Sir Robert or Sir Hugh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Jack, or Ralph, or whoso that it were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That lay by them, they told it in his ear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus were the wench and he of one assent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he would fetch a feigned mandement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the chapter summon them both two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pill<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2166" id="noteref-2166" epub:type="noteref">2166</a> the man, and let the wenchë go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then would he say, “Friend, I shall for thy sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do strike thee<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2167" id="noteref-2167" epub:type="noteref">2167</a> out of ourë letters blake;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2168" id="noteref-2168" epub:type="noteref">2168</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee thar<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2169" id="noteref-2169" epub:type="noteref">2169</a> no more as in this case travail;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am thy friend where I may thee avail.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Certain he knew of bribers many mo’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than possible is to tell in yearës two:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in this world is no dog for the bow,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2170" id="noteref-2170" epub:type="noteref">2170</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That can a hurt deer from a wholë know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2171" id="noteref-2171" epub:type="noteref">2171</a> than this Sompnour knew a sly lechour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or an adult’rer, or a paramour:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, for that was the fruit of all his rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore on it he set all his intent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And so befell, that once upon a day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Sompnour, waiting ever on his prey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rode forth to summon a widow, an old ribibe,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2172" id="noteref-2172" epub:type="noteref">2172</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feigning a cause, for he would have a bribe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And happen’d that he saw before him ride</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A gay yeoman under a forest side:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bow he bare, and arrows bright and keen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had upon a courtepy<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2173" id="noteref-2173" epub:type="noteref">2173</a> of green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hat upon his head with fringes blake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Sir,” quoth this Sompnour, “hail, and well o’ertake.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Welcome,” quoth he, “and every good felláw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whither ridést thou under this green shaw?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2174" id="noteref-2174" epub:type="noteref">2174</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saidë this yeoman; “wilt thou far to-day?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Sompnour answer’d him, and saidë, “Nay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here fastë by,” quoth he, “is mine intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ridë, for to raisen up a rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That longeth to my lordë’s duety.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ah! art thou then a bailiff?” “Yea,” quoth he.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He durstë not for very filth and shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say that he was a Sompnour, for the name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“<i xml:lang="fr">De par dieux</i>,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2175" id="noteref-2175" epub:type="noteref">2175</a> quoth this yeoman, “levë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2176" id="noteref-2176" epub:type="noteref">2176</a> brother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art a bailiff, and I am another.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am unknowen, as in this countrý.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thine acquaintance I will prayë thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke of brotherhood, if that thee list.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2177" id="noteref-2177" epub:type="noteref">2177</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have gold and silver lying in my chest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that thee hap to come into our shire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All shall be thine, right as thou wilt desire.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“<i xml:lang="fr">Grand mercy</i>,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2178" id="noteref-2178" epub:type="noteref">2178</a> quoth this Sompnour, “by my faith.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each in the other’s hand his trothë lay’th,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For to be swornë brethren till they dey.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2179" id="noteref-2179" epub:type="noteref">2179</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>In dalliance they ridë forth and play.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This Sompnour, which that was as full of jangles,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2180" id="noteref-2180" epub:type="noteref">2180</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As full of venom be those wariangles,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2181" id="noteref-2181" epub:type="noteref">2181</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ev’r inquiring upon every thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Brother,” quoth he, “where is now your dwelling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another day if that I should you seech?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2182" id="noteref-2182" epub:type="noteref">2182</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>This yeoman him answered in soft speech;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Brother,” quoth he, “far in the North countrý,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2183" id="noteref-2183" epub:type="noteref">2183</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where as I hope some time I shall thee see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere we depart I shall thee so well wiss,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2184" id="noteref-2184" epub:type="noteref">2184</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of mine housë shalt thou never miss.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now, brother,” quoth this Sompnour, “I you pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Teach me, while that we ridë by the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Since that ye be a bailiff as am I,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some subtilty, and tell me faithfully</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For mine offíce how that I most may win.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sparë not<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2185" id="noteref-2185" epub:type="noteref">2185</a> for conscience or for sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, as my brother, tell me how do ye.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now by my trothë, brother mine,” said he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“As I shall tell to thee a faithful tale:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My wages be full strait and eke full smale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My lord is hard to me and dangerous,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2186" id="noteref-2186" epub:type="noteref">2186</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mine offíce is full laborious;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore by extortión I live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forsooth I take all that men will me give.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Algate<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2187" id="noteref-2187" epub:type="noteref">2187</a> by sleightë, or by violence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From year to year I win all my dispence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I can no better tell thee faithfully.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now certes,” quoth this Sompnour, “so fare<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2188" id="noteref-2188" epub:type="noteref">2188</a> I;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sparë not to takë, God it wot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2189" id="noteref-2189" epub:type="noteref">2189</a> it be too heavy or too hot.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What I may get in counsel privily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No manner conscience of that have I.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>N’ere<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2190" id="noteref-2190" epub:type="noteref">2190</a> mine extortión, I might not live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For of such japës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2191" id="noteref-2191" epub:type="noteref">2191</a> will I not be shrive.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2192" id="noteref-2192" epub:type="noteref">2192</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stomach nor consciencë know I none;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shrew<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2193" id="noteref-2193" epub:type="noteref">2193</a> these shriftë-fathers<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2194" id="noteref-2194" epub:type="noteref">2194</a> every one.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well be we met, by God and by <abbr>St.</abbr> Jame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, levë brother, tell me then thy name,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quoth this Sompnour. Right in this meanë while</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This yeoman gan a little for to smile.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Brother,” quoth he, “wilt thou that I thee tell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am a fiend, my dwelling is in hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And here I ride about my purchasing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To know where men will give me any thing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My purchase is th’ effect of all my rent.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2195" id="noteref-2195" epub:type="noteref">2195</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look how thou ridest for the same intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To winnë good, thou reckest never how,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right so fare I, for ridë will I now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the worldë’s endë for a prey.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ah,” quoth this Sompnour, “<i xml:lang="la">benedicite!</i> what say y’?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I weened<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2196" id="noteref-2196" epub:type="noteref">2196</a> ye were a yeoman trulý.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye have a mannë’s shape as well as I.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have ye then a figúre determinate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In hellë, where ye be in your estate?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2197" id="noteref-2197" epub:type="noteref">2197</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nay, certainly,” quoth he, “there have we none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when us liketh we can take us one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ellës make you seem<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2198" id="noteref-2198" epub:type="noteref">2198</a> that we be shape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimë like a man, or like an ape;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or like an angel can I ride or go;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is no wondrous thing though it be so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lousy juggler can deceivë thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pardie, yet can<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2199" id="noteref-2199" epub:type="noteref">2199</a> I more craft<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2200" id="noteref-2200" epub:type="noteref">2200</a> than he.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Why,” quoth the Sompnour, “ride ye then or gon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sundry shapes and not always in one?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“For we,” quoth he, “will us in such form make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As most is able our prey for to take.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What maketh you to have all this laboúr?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Full many a causë, levë Sir Sompnoúr,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saidë this fiend. “But all thing hath a time;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The day is short and it is passed prime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet have I won nothing in this day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will intend<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2201" id="noteref-2201" epub:type="noteref">2201</a> to winning, if I may,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not intend our thingës to declare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, brother mine, thy wit is all too bare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To understand, although I told them thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2202" id="noteref-2202" epub:type="noteref">2202</a> thou askest why laboúrë we:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For sometimes we be Goddë’s instruments</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And meanës to do his commandëments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that him list, upon his creatures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In divers acts and in divérs figúres:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Withoutë him we have no might, certain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that him list to standë thereagain.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2203" id="noteref-2203" epub:type="noteref">2203</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sometimes, at our prayer, have we leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only the body, not the soul, to grieve:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Witness on Job, whom that we did full woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sometimes have we might on both the two⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is to say, on soul and body eke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sometimes be we suffer’d for to seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a man, and do his soul unrest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not his body, and all is for the best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he withstandeth our temptatión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is a cause of his salvatión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Albeit that it was not our intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He should be safe, but that we would him hent.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2204" id="noteref-2204" epub:type="noteref">2204</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sometimes be we servants unto man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As to the archbishop Saint Dunstan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to th’ apostle servant eke was I.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Yet tell me,” quoth this Sompnour, “faithfully,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make ye you newë bodies thus alway</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of th’ elements?” The fiend answered, “Nay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes we feign, and sometimes we arise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With deadë bodies, in full sundry wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And speak as reas’nably, and fair, and well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As to the Pythoness<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2205" id="noteref-2205" epub:type="noteref">2205</a> did Samuel:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet will some men say it was not he.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I do no force of<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2206" id="noteref-2206" epub:type="noteref">2206</a> your divinity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But one thing warn I thee, I will not jape,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2207" id="noteref-2207" epub:type="noteref">2207</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wilt algatës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2208" id="noteref-2208" epub:type="noteref">2208</a> weet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2209" id="noteref-2209" epub:type="noteref">2209</a> how we be shape:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt hereafterward, my brother dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come, where thee needeth not of me to lear.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2210" id="noteref-2210" epub:type="noteref">2210</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thou shalt by thine own experience</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conne in a chair to rede of this senténce,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2211" id="noteref-2211" epub:type="noteref">2211</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Better than Virgil, while he was alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Dante also.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2212" id="noteref-2212" epub:type="noteref">2212</a> Now let us ride blive,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2213" id="noteref-2213" epub:type="noteref">2213</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I will holdë company with thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till it be so that thou forsakë me.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Nay,” quoth this Sompnour, “that shall ne’er betide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am a yeoman, that is known full wide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My trothë will I hold, as in this case;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For though thou wert the devil Satanas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My trothë will I hold to thee, my brother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I have sworn, and each of us to other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For to be truë brethren in this case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And both we go abouten our purchase.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2214" id="noteref-2214" epub:type="noteref">2214</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take thou thy part, what that men will thee give,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I shall mine, thus may we bothë live.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if that any of us have more than other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let him be true, and part it with his brother.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I grantë,” quoth the devil, “by my fay.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with that word they rodë forth their way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And right at th’ ent’ring of the townë’s end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To which this Sompnour shope<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2215" id="noteref-2215" epub:type="noteref">2215</a> him for to wend,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2216" id="noteref-2216" epub:type="noteref">2216</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>They saw a cart, that charged was with hay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which that a carter drove forth on his way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deep was the way, for which the cartë stood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The carter smote, and cried as he were wood,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2217" id="noteref-2217" epub:type="noteref">2217</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Heit Scot! heit Brok! what, spare ye for the stones?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fiend (quoth he) you fetch body and bones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As farforthly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2218" id="noteref-2218" epub:type="noteref">2218</a> as ever ye were foal’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So muchë woe as I have with you tholed.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2219" id="noteref-2219" epub:type="noteref">2219</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The devil have all, horses, and cart, and hay.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Sompnour said, “Here shall we have a prey;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And near the fiend he drew, as nought ne were,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2220" id="noteref-2220" epub:type="noteref">2220</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full privily, and rowned<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2221" id="noteref-2221" epub:type="noteref">2221</a> in his ear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Hearken, my brother, hearken, by thy faith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hearest thou not, how that the carter saith?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2222" id="noteref-2222" epub:type="noteref">2222</a> it anon, for he hath giv’n it thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both hay and cart, and eke his capels<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2223" id="noteref-2223" epub:type="noteref">2223</a> three.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nay,” quoth the devil, “God wot, never a deal,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2224" id="noteref-2224" epub:type="noteref">2224</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is not his intent, trust thou me well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ask him thyself, if thou not trowest<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2225" id="noteref-2225" epub:type="noteref">2225</a> me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ellës stint<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2226" id="noteref-2226" epub:type="noteref">2226</a> a while and thou shalt see.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The carter thwack’d his horses on the croup,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they began to drawen and to stoop.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Heit now,” quoth he; “there, Jesus Christ you bless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all his handiwork, both more and less!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was well twight,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2227" id="noteref-2227" epub:type="noteref">2227</a> mine owen liart,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2228" id="noteref-2228" epub:type="noteref">2228</a> boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray God save thy body, and Saint Loy!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now is my cart out of the slough, pardie.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Lo, brother,” quoth the fiend, “what told I thee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here may ye see, mine owen dearë brother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The churl spake one thing, but he thought another.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us go forth abouten our voyáge;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here win I nothing upon this carriáge.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When that they came somewhat out of the town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Sompnour to his brother gan to rown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Brother,” quoth he, “here wons<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2229" id="noteref-2229" epub:type="noteref">2229</a> an old rebeck,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2230" id="noteref-2230" epub:type="noteref">2230</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That had almost as lief to lose her neck.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As for to give a penny of her good.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will have twelvepence, though that she be wood,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2231" id="noteref-2231" epub:type="noteref">2231</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or I will summon her to our offíce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet, God wot, of her know I no vice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for thou canst not, as in this countrý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Winnë thy cost, take here example of me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Sompnour clapped at the widow’s gate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Come out,” he said, “thou oldë very trate;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2232" id="noteref-2232" epub:type="noteref">2232</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I trow thou hast some friar or priest with thee.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Who clappeth?” said this wife; “<i xml:lang="la">ben’dicite</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God save you, Sir, what is your sweetë will?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I have,” quoth he, “of summons here a bill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2233" id="noteref-2233" epub:type="noteref">2233</a> pain of cursing, lookë that thou be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-morrow before our archdeacon’s knee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To answer to the court of certain things.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now Lord,” quoth she, “Christ Jesus, king of kings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So wis1y<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2234" id="noteref-2234" epub:type="noteref">2234</a> helpë me, as I not may.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2235" id="noteref-2235" epub:type="noteref">2235</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have been sick, and that full many a day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I may not go so far,” quoth she, “nor ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I be dead, so pricketh<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2236" id="noteref-2236" epub:type="noteref">2236</a> it my side.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May I not ask a libel, Sir Sompnoúr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And answer there by my procúratoúr</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To such thing as men would apposë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2237" id="noteref-2237" epub:type="noteref">2237</a> me?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Yes,” quoth this Sompnour, “pay anon, let see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twelvepence to me, and I will thee acquit.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall no profit have thereby but lit:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2238" id="noteref-2238" epub:type="noteref">2238</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>My master hath the profit and not I.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come off, and let me ridë hastily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give me twelvepence, I may no longer tarry.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Twelvepence!” quoth she; “now lady Saintë Mary</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So wisly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2239" id="noteref-2239" epub:type="noteref">2239</a> help me out of care and sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This widë world though that I should it win,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne have I not twelvepence within my hold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye know full well that I am poor and old;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kithë your almës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2240" id="noteref-2240" epub:type="noteref">2240</a> upon me poor wretch.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nay then,” quoth he, “the foulë fiend me fetch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I excuse thee, though thou should’st be spilt.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2241" id="noteref-2241" epub:type="noteref">2241</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Alas!” quoth she, “God wot, I have no guilt.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Pay me,” quoth he, “or, by the sweet Saint Anne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I will bear away thy newë pan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For debtë, which thou owest me of old⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that thou madest thine husbánd cuckóld⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I paid at home for thy correctión.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thou liest,” quoth she, “by my salvatión;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never was I ere now, widow or wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Summon’d unto your court in all my life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor never I was but of my body true.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the devil rough and black of hue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give I thy body and my pan also.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when the devil heard her cursë so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon her knees, he said in this mannére;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now, Mabily, mine owen mother dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is this your will in earnest that ye say?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“The devil,” quoth she, “so fetch him ere he dey,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2242" id="noteref-2242" epub:type="noteref">2242</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pan and all, but<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2243" id="noteref-2243" epub:type="noteref">2243</a> he will him repent.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nay, oldë stoat,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2244" id="noteref-2244" epub:type="noteref">2244</a> that is not mine intent,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quoth this Sompnour, “for to repentë me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For any thing that I have had of thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would I had thy smock and every cloth.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now, brother,” quoth the devil, “be not wroth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy body and this pan be mine by right.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt with me to hellë yet tonight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where thou shalt knowen of our privity<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2245" id="noteref-2245" epub:type="noteref">2245</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than a master of divinity.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And with that word the foulë fiend him hent.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2246" id="noteref-2246" epub:type="noteref">2246</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Body and soul, he with the devil went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where as the Sompnours have their heritage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And God, that maked after his imáge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mankindë, save and guide us all and some,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let this Sompnour a good man become.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lordings, I could have told you (quoth this Frere),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had I had leisure for this Sompnour here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the text of Christ, and Paul, and John,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of our other doctors many a one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such painës, that your heartës might agrise,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2247" id="noteref-2247" epub:type="noteref">2247</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Albeit so, that no tongue may devise⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2248" id="noteref-2248" epub:type="noteref">2248</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though that I might a thousand winters tell⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pains of thilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2249" id="noteref-2249" epub:type="noteref">2249</a> cursed house of hell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for to keep us from that cursed place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wake we, and pray we Jesus, of his grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So keep us from the tempter, Satanas.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hearken this word, beware as in this case.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lion sits in his await<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2250" id="noteref-2250" epub:type="noteref">2250</a> alway</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To slay the innocent, if that he may.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disposen aye your heartës to withstond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fiend that would you makë thrall and bond;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He may not temptë you over your might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Christ will be your champion and your knight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pray, that this our Sompnour him repent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his misdeeds ere that the fiend him hent.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2251" id="noteref-2251" epub:type="noteref">2251</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
