<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Franklin’s Tale</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-franklins-tale" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Franklin’s Tale</h2>
			<section id="the-franklins-tale-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Prologue<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3205" id="noteref-3205" epub:type="noteref">3205</a></h3>
				<p>
					<span>“In faith, Squiër, thou hast thee well acquit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gentilly; I praisë well thy wit,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quoth the Franklin; “considering thy youthë</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So feelingly thou speak’st, Sir, I aloue<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3206" id="noteref-3206" epub:type="noteref">3206</a> thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As to my doom,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3207" id="noteref-3207" epub:type="noteref">3207</a> there is none that is here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of eloquencë that shall be thy peer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that thou live; God give thee goodë chance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in virtúe send thee continuánce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For of thy speaking I have great daintý.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3208" id="noteref-3208" epub:type="noteref">3208</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have a son, and, by the Trinitý;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It were me lever<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3209" id="noteref-3209" epub:type="noteref">3209</a> than twenty pound worth land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though it right now were fallen in my hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He were a man of such discretión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As that ye be: fy on possessión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3210" id="noteref-3210" epub:type="noteref">3210</a> a man be virtuous withal.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have my sonë snibbed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3211" id="noteref-3211" epub:type="noteref">3211</a> and yet shall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he to virtue listeth not t’ intend,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3212" id="noteref-3212" epub:type="noteref">3212</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for to play at dice, and to dispend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lose all that he hath, is his uságe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he had lever talkë with a page,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than to commune with any gentle wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There he might learen gentilless aright.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Straw for your gentillessë!” quoth our Host.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What? Frankëlin, pardie, Sir, well thou wost<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3213" id="noteref-3213" epub:type="noteref">3213</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That each of you must tellen at the least</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A tale or two, or breakë his behest.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3214" id="noteref-3214" epub:type="noteref">3214</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“That know I well, Sir,” quoth the Frankëlin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I pray you havë me not in disdain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though I to this man speak a word or two.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Tell on thy tale, withoutë wordës mo’.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Gladly, Sir Host,” quoth he, “I will obey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto your will; now hearken what I say;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will you not contráry in no wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As far as that my wittës may suffice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray to God that it may pleasë you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then wot I well that it is good enow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“These oldë gentle Bretons, in their days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of divers áventúrës madë lays,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3215" id="noteref-3215" epub:type="noteref">3215</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rhymeden in their firstë Breton tongue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which layës with their instruments they sung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ellës readë them for their pleasánce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one of them have I in remembránce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which I shall say with good will as I can.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, Sirs, because I am a borel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3216" id="noteref-3216" epub:type="noteref">3216</a> man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At my beginning first I you beseech</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have me excused of my rudë speech.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I learned never rhetoric, certáin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thing that I speak, it must be bare and plain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I slept never on the mount of Parnassó,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor learned Marcus Tullius Cicero.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Coloúrës know I none, withoutë dread,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3217" id="noteref-3217" epub:type="noteref">3217</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But such coloúrs as growen in the mead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ellës such as men dye with or paint;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Coloúrs of rhetoric be to me quaint;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3218" id="noteref-3218" epub:type="noteref">3218</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>My spirit feeleth not of such mattére.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, if you list, my talë shall ye hear.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-franklins-tale-body" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Tale</h3>
				<p>
					<span>In Armoric’, that called is Bretagne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was a knight, that lov’d and did his pain<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3219" id="noteref-3219" epub:type="noteref">3219</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To serve a lady in his bestë wise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many a labour, many a great emprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He for his lady wrought, ere she were won:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she was one the fairest under sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke thereto come of so high kindréd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That well unnethës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3220" id="noteref-3220" epub:type="noteref">3220</a> durst this knight, for dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell her his woe, his pain, and his distress.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, at the last, she for his worthiness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And namëly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3221" id="noteref-3221" epub:type="noteref">3221</a> for his meek obeisánce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath such a pity caught of his penánce,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3222" id="noteref-3222" epub:type="noteref">3222</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That privily she fell of his accord</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To take him for her husband and her lord</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Of such lordship as men have o’er their wives);</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, for to lead the more in bliss their lives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his free will he swore her as a knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That never in all his life he day nor night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should take upon himself no mastery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against her will, nor kithe<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3223" id="noteref-3223" epub:type="noteref">3223</a> her jealousy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But her obey, and follow her will in all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As any lover to his lady shall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save that the name of sovereignëty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That would he have, for shame of his degree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She thanked him, and with full great humbléss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She saidë; “Sir, since of your gentleness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye proffer me to have so large a reign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne wouldë God never betwixt us twain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in my guilt, were either war or strife:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3224" id="noteref-3224" epub:type="noteref">3224</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sir, I will be your humble truë wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have here my troth, till that my heartë brest.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3225" id="noteref-3225" epub:type="noteref">3225</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus be they both in quiet and in rest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For one thing, Sirës, safely dare I say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That friends ever each other must obey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If they will longë hold in company.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love will not be constrain’d by mastery.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When mast’ry comes, the god of love anon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beateth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3226" id="noteref-3226" epub:type="noteref">3226</a> his wings, and, farewell, he is gone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love is a thing as any spirit free.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Women of kind<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3227" id="noteref-3227" epub:type="noteref">3227</a> desirë liberty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not to be constrained as a thrall;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3228" id="noteref-3228" epub:type="noteref">3228</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so do men, if soothly I say shall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look who that is most patiént in love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is at his advantage all above.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3229" id="noteref-3229" epub:type="noteref">3229</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Patience is a high virtúe certáin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For it vanquísheth, as these clerkës sayn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thingës that rigour never should attain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For every word men may not chide or plain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Learnë to suffer, or, so may I go,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3230" id="noteref-3230" epub:type="noteref">3230</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye shall it learn whether ye will or no.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in this world certáin no wight there is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he not doth or saith sometimes amiss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ire, or sicknéss, or constellatión,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3231" id="noteref-3231" epub:type="noteref">3231</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wine, woe, or changing of complexión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Causeth full oft to do amiss or speaken:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On every wrong a man may not be wreaken.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3232" id="noteref-3232" epub:type="noteref">3232</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>After<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3233" id="noteref-3233" epub:type="noteref">3233</a> the timë must be temperance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To every wight that can of<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3234" id="noteref-3234" epub:type="noteref">3234</a> governance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore hath this worthy wisë knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(To live in easë) suff’rance her behight;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3235" id="noteref-3235" epub:type="noteref">3235</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she to him full wisly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3236" id="noteref-3236" epub:type="noteref">3236</a> gan to swear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That never should there be default in her.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here may men see a humble wife accord;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus hath she ta’en her servant and her lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Servant in love, and lord in marriáge.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then was he both in lordship and servage?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Servage? nay, but in lordship all above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since he had both his lady and his love:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His lady certes, and his wife also,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which that law of love accordeth to.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when he was in this prosperity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Home with his wife he went to his country,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not far from Penmark,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3237" id="noteref-3237" epub:type="noteref">3237</a> where his dwelling was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there he liv’d in bliss and in solace.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3238" id="noteref-3238" epub:type="noteref">3238</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who couldë tell, but<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3239" id="noteref-3239" epub:type="noteref">3239</a> he had wedded be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The joy, the ease, and the prosperity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is betwixt a husband and his wife?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A year and more lasted this blissful life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till that this knight, of whom I spakë thus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of Cairrud<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3240" id="noteref-3240" epub:type="noteref">3240</a> was call’d Arviragus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shope<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3241" id="noteref-3241" epub:type="noteref">3241</a> him to go and dwell a year or twain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Engleland, that call’d was eke Britáin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To seek in armës worship and honoúr</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(For all his lust<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3242" id="noteref-3242" epub:type="noteref">3242</a> he set in such laboúr);</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dwelled there two years; the book saith thus.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now will I stint<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3243" id="noteref-3243" epub:type="noteref">3243</a> of this Arviragus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And speak I will of Dorigen his wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That lov’d her husband as her heartë’s life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For his abséncë weepeth she and siketh,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3244" id="noteref-3244" epub:type="noteref">3244</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As do these noble wivës when them liketh;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She mourneth, waketh, waileth, fasteth, plaineth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Desire of his presénce her so distraineth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all this widë world she set at nought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her friendës, which that knew her heavy thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comfórtë her in all that ever they may;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They preachë her, they tell her night and day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That causëless she slays herself, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every comfort possible in this case</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They do to her, with all their business,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3245" id="noteref-3245" epub:type="noteref">3245</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all to make her leave her heaviness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By process, as ye knowen every one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men may so longë graven in a stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till some figúre therein imprinted be:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So long have they comfórted her, till she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Received hath, by hope and by reasón,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ imprinting of their consolatión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through which her greatë sorrow gan assuage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She may not always duren in such rage.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke Arviragus, in all this care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath sent his letters home of his welfare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that he will come hastily again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ellës had this sorrow her hearty-slain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her friendës saw her sorrow gin to slake,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3246" id="noteref-3246" epub:type="noteref">3246</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And prayed her on knees for Goddë’s sake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To come and roamen in their company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Away to drive her darkë fantasy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And finally she granted that request,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For well she saw that it was for the best.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now stood her castle fastë by the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And often with her friendës walked she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her to disport upon the bank on high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There as many a ship and bargë sigh,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3247" id="noteref-3247" epub:type="noteref">3247</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sailing their courses, where them list to go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But then was that a parcel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3248" id="noteref-3248" epub:type="noteref">3248</a> of her woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For to herself full oft, “Alas!” said she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Is there no ship, of so many as I see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will bringë home my lord? then were my heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All warish’d<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3249" id="noteref-3249" epub:type="noteref">3249</a> of this bitter painë’s smart.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another timë would she sit and think,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cast her eyen downward from the brink;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when she saw the grisly rockës blake,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3250" id="noteref-3250" epub:type="noteref">3250</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For very fear so would her heartë quake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That on her feet she might her not sustene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then would she sit adown upon the green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And piteously into the sea behold,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3251" id="noteref-3251" epub:type="noteref">3251</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And say right thus, with careful sikës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3252" id="noteref-3252" epub:type="noteref">3252</a> cold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Eternal God! that through thy purveyánce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leadest this world by certain governance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In idle,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3253" id="noteref-3253" epub:type="noteref">3253</a> as men say, ye nothing make;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, Lord, these grisly fiendly rockës blake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That seem rather a foul confusión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of work, than any fair creatión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of such a perfect wisë God and stable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why have ye wrought this work unreasonáble?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For by this work, north, south, or west, or east,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is not foster’d man, nor bird, nor beast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It doth no good, to my wit, but annoyeth.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3254" id="noteref-3254" epub:type="noteref">3254</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>See ye not, Lord, how mankind it destroyeth?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hundred thousand bodies of mankind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have rockës slain, all be they not in mind;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3255" id="noteref-3255" epub:type="noteref">3255</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which mankind is so fair part of thy work,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou madest it like to thine owen mark.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3256" id="noteref-3256" epub:type="noteref">3256</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then seemed it ye had a great cherté<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3257" id="noteref-3257" epub:type="noteref">3257</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toward mankind; but how then may it be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ye such meanës make it to destroy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which meanës do no good, but ever annoy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wot well, clerkës will say as them lest,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3258" id="noteref-3258" epub:type="noteref">3258</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>By arguments, that all is for the best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although I can the causes not y-know;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3259" id="noteref-3259" epub:type="noteref">3259</a> God that made the wind to blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As keep my lord, this is my conclusión:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To clerks leave I all disputatión:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But would to God that all these rockës blake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were sunken into hellë for his sake!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These rockës slay mine heartë for the fear.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus would she say, with many a piteous tear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Her friendës saw that it was no disport</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To roamë by the sea, but discomfórt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shope them for to playë somewhere else.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They leadë her by rivers and by wells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke in other places delectábles;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They dancen, and they play at chess and tables.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So on a day, right in the morning-tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto a garden that was there beside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which that they had made their ordinance<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3260" id="noteref-3260" epub:type="noteref">3260</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of victual, and of other purveyánce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They go and play them all the longë day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this was on the sixth morrow of May,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which May had painted with his softë show’rs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This garden full of leavës and of flow’rs:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And craft of mannë’s hand so curiously</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arrayed had this garden truëly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That never was there garden of such price,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3261" id="noteref-3261" epub:type="noteref">3261</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if it were the very Paradise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ odoúr of flowers, and the freshë sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would havë maked any heartë light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That e’er was born, but if<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3262" id="noteref-3262" epub:type="noteref">3262</a> too great sicknéss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or too great sorrow held it in distress;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So full it was of beauty and pleasánce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after dinner they began to dance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sing also, save Dorigen alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who made alway her cómplaint and her moan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she saw not him on the dancë go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was her husband, and her love also;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But natheless she must a time abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with good hopë let her sorrow slide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Upon this dance, amongë other men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Danced a squiër before Dorigen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fresher was, and jollier of array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As to my doom,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3263" id="noteref-3263" epub:type="noteref">3263</a> than is the month of May.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sang and danced, passing any man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is or was since that the world began;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therewith he was, if men should him descrive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One of the bestë faring<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3264" id="noteref-3264" epub:type="noteref">3264</a> men alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young, strong, and virtuous, and rich, and wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And well belov’d, and holden in great price.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3265" id="noteref-3265" epub:type="noteref">3265</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, shortly if the sooth I tellë shall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unweeting<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3266" id="noteref-3266" epub:type="noteref">3266</a> of this Dorigen at all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This lusty squiër, servant to Venús,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which that y-called was Aurelius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had lov’d her best of any creatúre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two year and more, as was his áventúre;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3267" id="noteref-3267" epub:type="noteref">3267</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But never durst he tell her his grievánce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Withoutë cup he drank all his penánce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was despaired, nothing durst he say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save in his songës somewhat would he wray<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3268" id="noteref-3268" epub:type="noteref">3268</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>His woe, as in a general cómplainíng;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said, he lov’d, and was belov’d nothing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of suchë matter made he many lays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Songës, complaintës, roundels, virëlays;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3269" id="noteref-3269" epub:type="noteref">3269</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>How that he durstë not his sorrow tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But languished, as doth a Fury in hell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And die he must, he said, as did Echo</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Narcissus, that durst not tell her woe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In other manner than ye hear me say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He durstë not to her his woe bewray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save that paráventure sometimes at dances,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where youngë folkë keep their óbservánces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It may well be he looked on her face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In such a wise, as man that asketh grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But nothing wistë she of his intent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nath’less it happen’d, ere they thennës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3270" id="noteref-3270" epub:type="noteref">3270</a> went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Becausë that he was her neighëbour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And was a man of worship and honoúr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she had knowen him of timë yore,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3271" id="noteref-3271" epub:type="noteref">3271</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>They fell in speech, and forth aye more and more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto his purpose drew Aurelius;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when he saw his time, he saidë thus:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Madam,” quoth he, “by God that this world made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that I wist it might your heartë glade,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3272" id="noteref-3272" epub:type="noteref">3272</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would, that day that your Arviragus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went over sea, that I, Aurelius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had gone where I should never come again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For well I wot my service is in vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My guerdon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3273" id="noteref-3273" epub:type="noteref">3273</a> is but bursting of mine heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Madamë, rue upon my painë’s smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For with a word ye may me slay or save.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here at your feet God would that I were grave.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3274" id="noteref-3274" epub:type="noteref">3274</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I havë now no leisure more to say:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have mercy, sweet, or you will do me dey.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3275" id="noteref-3275" epub:type="noteref">3275</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She gan to look upon Aurelius;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Is this your will,” quoth she, “and say ye thus?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne’er erst,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3276" id="noteref-3276" epub:type="noteref">3276</a> quoth she, “I wistë what ye meant:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now, Aurelius, I know your intent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By thilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3277" id="noteref-3277" epub:type="noteref">3277</a> God that gave me soul and life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never shall I be an untruë wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In word nor work, as far as I have wit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will be his to whom that I am knit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take this for final answer as of me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But after that in play<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3278" id="noteref-3278" epub:type="noteref">3278</a> thus saidë she.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Aurelius,” quoth she, “by high God above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet will I grantë you to be your love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Since I you see so piteously complain);</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lookë, what day that endëlong<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3279" id="noteref-3279" epub:type="noteref">3279</a> Bretágne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye remove all the rockës, stone by stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they not lettë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3280" id="noteref-3280" epub:type="noteref">3280</a> ship nor boat to gon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say, when ye have made this coast so clean</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of rockës, that there is no stonë seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then will I love you best of any man;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have here my troth, in all that ever I can;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For well I wot that it shall ne’er betide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let such follý out of your heartë glide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What dainty<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3281" id="noteref-3281" epub:type="noteref">3281</a> should a man have in his life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For to go love another mannë’s wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hath her body when that ever him liketh?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aurelius full often sorë siketh;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3282" id="noteref-3282" epub:type="noteref">3282</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Is there none other grace in you?” quoth he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“No, by that Lord,” quoth she, “that maked me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Woe was Aurelius when that he this heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with a sorrowful heart he thus answér’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Madame,” quoth he, “this were an impossíble.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then must I die of sudden death horríble.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with that word he turned him anon.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then came her other friends many a one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the alleys roamed up and down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nothing wist of this conclusión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But suddenly began to revel new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till that the brightë sun had lost his hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For th’ horizón had reft the sun his light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(This is as much to say as it was night);</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And home they go in mirth and in solace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save only wretch’d Aurelius, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He to his house is gone with sorrowful heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said, he may not from his death astart.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3283" id="noteref-3283" epub:type="noteref">3283</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him seemed, that he felt his heartë cold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up to the heav’n his handës gan he hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on his kneës bare he set him down.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his raving said his orisoún.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3284" id="noteref-3284" epub:type="noteref">3284</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For very woe out of his wit he braid;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3285" id="noteref-3285" epub:type="noteref">3285</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wist not what he spake, but thus he said;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With piteous heart his plaint hath he begun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the gods, and first unto the Sun.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said; “Apollo God and governoúr</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of every plantë, herbë, tree, and flow’r,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That giv’st, after thy declinatión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To each of them his time and his seasón,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thine herberow<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3286" id="noteref-3286" epub:type="noteref">3286</a> changeth low and high;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lord Phoebus! cast thy merciable<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3287" id="noteref-3287" epub:type="noteref">3287</a> eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On wretch’d Aurelius, which that am but lorn.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3288" id="noteref-3288" epub:type="noteref">3288</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, lord, my lady hath my death y-sworn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Withoutë guilt, but<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3289" id="noteref-3289" epub:type="noteref">3289</a> thy benignity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon my deadly heart have some pitý.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For well I wot, Lord Phoebus, if you lest,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3290" id="noteref-3290" epub:type="noteref">3290</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye may me helpë, save my lady, best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now vouchësafe, that I may you devise<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3291" id="noteref-3291" epub:type="noteref">3291</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>How that I may be holp,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3292" id="noteref-3292" epub:type="noteref">3292</a> and in what wise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your blissful sister, Lucina the sheen,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3293" id="noteref-3293" epub:type="noteref">3293</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of the sea is chief goddéss and queen⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though Neptunus have deity in the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet emperess abovë him is she;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye know well, lord, that, right as her desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is to be quick’d<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3294" id="noteref-3294" epub:type="noteref">3294</a> and lighted of your fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which she followeth you full busily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right so the sea desireth naturally</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To follow her, as she that is goddéss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both in the sea and rivers more and less.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore, Lord Phoebus, this is my request,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do this mirácle, or do<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3295" id="noteref-3295" epub:type="noteref">3295</a> mine heartë brest;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3296" id="noteref-3296" epub:type="noteref">3296</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That now, next at this oppositión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which in the sign shall be of the Lión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As prayë her so great a flood to bring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That five fathóm at least it overspring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The highest rock in Armoric’ Bretágne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let this flood endurë yearës twain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then certes to my lady may I say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Holdë your hest,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3297" id="noteref-3297" epub:type="noteref">3297</a> the rockës be away.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lord Phoebus, this mirácle do for me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pray her she go no faster course than ye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say this, “pray your sister that she go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No faster course than ye these yearës two:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then shall she be even at full alway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And spring-flood lastë bothë night and day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And but she<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3298" id="noteref-3298" epub:type="noteref">3298</a> vouchësafe in such mannére</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To grantë me my sov’reign lady dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pray her to sink every rock adown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into her owen darkë regioún</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the ground, where Pluto dwelleth in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or nevermore shall I my lady win.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy temple in Delphos will I barefoot seek.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lord Phoebus! see the tearës on my cheek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on my pain have some compassioún.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with that word in sorrow he fell down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And longë time he lay forth in a trance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His brother, which that knew of his penánce,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3299" id="noteref-3299" epub:type="noteref">3299</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up caught him, and to bed he hath him brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Despaired in this torment and this thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let I this woeful creatúrë lie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Choose he for me whe’er<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3300" id="noteref-3300" epub:type="noteref">3300</a> he will live or die.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Arviragus with health and great honoúr</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(As he that was of chivalry the flow’r)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is comë home, and other worthy men.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, blissful art thou now, thou Dorigen!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast thy lusty husband in thine arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The freshë knight, the worthy man of arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That loveth thee as his own heartë’s life:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing list him to be imaginatif<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3301" id="noteref-3301" epub:type="noteref">3301</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>If any wight had spoke, while he was out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To her of love; he had of that no doubt;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3302" id="noteref-3302" epub:type="noteref">3302</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He not intended<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3303" id="noteref-3303" epub:type="noteref">3303</a> to no such mattére,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But danced, jousted, and made merry cheer.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus in joy and bliss I let them dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of the sick Aurelius will I tell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In languor and in torment furious</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two year and more lay wretch’d Aurelius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere any foot on earth he mightë gon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor comfort in this timë had he none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save of his brother, which that was a clerk.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3304" id="noteref-3304" epub:type="noteref">3304</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He knew of all this woe and all this work;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For to none other creatúre certáin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this matter he durst no wordë sayn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under his breast he bare it more secré</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than e’er did Pamphilus for Galatee.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3305" id="noteref-3305" epub:type="noteref">3305</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>His breast was whole withoutë for to seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in his heart aye was the arrow keen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And well ye know that of a sursanure<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3306" id="noteref-3306" epub:type="noteref">3306</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>In surgery is perilous the cure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3307" id="noteref-3307" epub:type="noteref">3307</a> men might touch the arrow or come thereby.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His brother wept and wailed privily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till at the last him fell in rémembránce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That while he was at Orleans<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3308" id="noteref-3308" epub:type="noteref">3308</a> in France⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As youngë clerkës, that be likerous<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3309" id="noteref-3309" epub:type="noteref">3309</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To readen artës that be curious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeken in every halk and every hern<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3310" id="noteref-3310" epub:type="noteref">3310</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Particular sciénces for to learn⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He him remember’d, that upon a day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Orleans in study a book he say<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3311" id="noteref-3311" epub:type="noteref">3311</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of magic natural, which his felláw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was that time a bachelor of law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3312" id="noteref-3312" epub:type="noteref">3312</a> were he there to learn another craft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had privily upon his desk y-laft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which book spake much of operatións</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Touching the eight and-twenty mansións</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That longë to the Moon, and such follý</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in our dayës is not worth a fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For holy church’s faith, in our believe,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3313" id="noteref-3313" epub:type="noteref">3313</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Us suff’reth none illusión to grieve.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when this book was in his rémembránce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon for joy his heart began to dance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to himself he saidë privily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My brother shall be warish’d<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3314" id="noteref-3314" epub:type="noteref">3314</a> hastily:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I am sicker<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3315" id="noteref-3315" epub:type="noteref">3315</a> that there be sciénces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By which men makë divers apparences,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as these subtle tregetourës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3316" id="noteref-3316" epub:type="noteref">3316</a> play.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For oft at feastës have I well heard say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That tregetours, within a hallë large,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have made come in a water and a barge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the hallë rowen up and down.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes hath seemed come a grim lioún,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sometimes flowers spring as in a mead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes a vine, and grapës white and red;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes a castle all of lime and stone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, when them liked, voided<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3317" id="noteref-3317" epub:type="noteref">3317</a> it anon:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus seemed it to every mannë’s sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now then conclude I thus; if that I might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Orleans some oldë fellow find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hath these Moonë’s mansións in mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or other magic natural above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He should well make my brother have his love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For with an áppearánce a clerk<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3318" id="noteref-3318" epub:type="noteref">3318</a> may make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mannë’s sight, that all the rockës blake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Brétagne werë voided<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3319" id="noteref-3319" epub:type="noteref">3319</a> every one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shippës by the brinkë come and gon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in such form endure a day or two;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then were my brother warish’d<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3320" id="noteref-3320" epub:type="noteref">3320</a> of his woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then must she needës holdë her behest,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3321" id="noteref-3321" epub:type="noteref">3321</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ellës he shall shame her at the least.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should I make a longer tale of this?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto his brother’s bed he comen is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And such comfórt he gave him, for to gon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Orleans, that he upstart anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on his way forth-ward then is he fare,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3322" id="noteref-3322" epub:type="noteref">3322</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>In hope for to be lissed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3323" id="noteref-3323" epub:type="noteref">3323</a> of his care.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When they were come almost to that citý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if it were<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3324" id="noteref-3324" epub:type="noteref">3324</a> a two furlong or three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A young clerk roaming by himself they met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which that in Latin thriftily<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3325" id="noteref-3325" epub:type="noteref">3325</a> them gret.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3326" id="noteref-3326" epub:type="noteref">3326</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after that he said a wondrous thing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I know,” quoth he, “the cause of your comíng;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ere they farther any footë went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He told them all that was in their intent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Breton clerk him asked of felláws</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which he haddë known in oldë daws,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3327" id="noteref-3327" epub:type="noteref">3327</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he answér’d him that they deadë were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which he wept full often many a tear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down off his horse Aurelius light anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And forth with this magician is be gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Home to his house, and made him well at ease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Them lacked no vitáil that might them please.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So well-array’d a house as there was one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aurelius in his life saw never none.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shewed him, ere they went to suppére,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forestës, parkës, full of wildë deer.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There saw he hartës with their hornës high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The greatest that were ever seen with eye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw of them an hundred slain with hounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And some with arrows bleed of bitter wounds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw, when voided<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3328" id="noteref-3328" epub:type="noteref">3328</a> were the wildë deer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These falconers upon a fair rivére,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That with their hawkës have the heron slain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then saw he knightës jousting in a plain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after this he did him such pleasánce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he him shew’d his lady on a dance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which himselfë danced, as him thought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when this master, that this magic wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saw it was time, he clapp’d his handës two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And farewell, all the revel is y-go.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3329" id="noteref-3329" epub:type="noteref">3329</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet remov’d they never out of the house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While they saw all the sightës marvelloús;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in his study, where his bookës be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They sattë still, and no wight but they three.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To him this master called his squiér,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said him thus, “May we go to suppér?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Almost an hour it is, I undertake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since I you bade our supper for to make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that these worthy men wentë with me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into my study, where my bookës be.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Sir,” quoth this squiër, “when it liketh you.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is all ready, though ye will right now.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Go we then sup,” quoth he, “as for the best;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These amorous folk some time must have rest.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At after supper fell they in treatý</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What summë should this master’s guerdon be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To remove all the rockës of Bretágne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke from Gironde<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3330" id="noteref-3330" epub:type="noteref">3330</a> to the mouth of Seine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He made it strange,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3331" id="noteref-3331" epub:type="noteref">3331</a> and swore, so God him save,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Less than a thousand pound he would not have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor gladly for that sum he would not gon.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3332" id="noteref-3332" epub:type="noteref">3332</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aurelius with blissful heart anon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Answered thus; “Fie on a thousand pound!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This widë world, which that men say is round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would it give, if I were lord of it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This bargain is full-driv’n, for we be knit;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3333" id="noteref-3333" epub:type="noteref">3333</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye shall be payed truly by my troth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But lookë, for no negligence or sloth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye tarry us here no longer than to-morrow.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nay,” quoth the clerk, “have here my faith to borrow.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3334" id="noteref-3334" epub:type="noteref">3334</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bed is gone Aurelius when him lest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And well-nigh all that night he had his rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What for his labour, and his hope of bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His woeful heart of penance had a liss.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3335" id="noteref-3335" epub:type="noteref">3335</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Upon the morrow, when that it was day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto Bretágne they took the rightë way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aurelius and this magicián beside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And be descended where they would abide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this was, as the bookës me remember,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The coldë frosty season of December.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Phoebus wax’d old, and huëd like latoun,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3336" id="noteref-3336" epub:type="noteref">3336</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in his hotë declinatioún</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shone as the burned gold, with streamës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3337" id="noteref-3337" epub:type="noteref">3337</a> bright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now in Capricorn adown he light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where as he shone full pale, I dare well sayn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bitter frostës, with the sleet and rain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Destroyed have the green in every yard.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3338" id="noteref-3338" epub:type="noteref">3338</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Janus sits by the fire with double beard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drinketh of his bugle horn the wine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before him stands the brawn of tusked swine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And “nowel”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3339" id="noteref-3339" epub:type="noteref">3339</a> crieth every lusty man.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aurelius, in all that ev’r he can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did to his master cheer and reverence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And prayed him to do his diligence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bringë him out of his painë’s smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or with a sword that he would slit his heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This subtle clerk such ruth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3340" id="noteref-3340" epub:type="noteref">3340</a> had on this man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That night and day he sped him, that he can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wait a time of his conclusión;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is to say, to make illusión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By such an áppearánce of jugglery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(I know no termës of astrology),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she and every wight should ween and say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of Bretágne the rockës were away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or else they werë sunken under ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So at the last he hath a timë found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make his japës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3341" id="noteref-3341" epub:type="noteref">3341</a> and his wretchedness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of such a superstitious cursedness.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3342" id="noteref-3342" epub:type="noteref">3342</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>His tables Toletanës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3343" id="noteref-3343" epub:type="noteref">3343</a> forth he brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full well corrected, that there lacked nought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Neither his collect, nor his expanse years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Neither his rootës, nor his other gears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As be his centres, and his arguments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his proportional conveniénts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For his equatións in everything.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by his eightë spheres in his workíng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He knew full well how far Alnath<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3344" id="noteref-3344" epub:type="noteref">3344</a> was shove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the head of that fix’d Aries above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in the ninthë sphere consider’d is.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full subtilly he calcul’d all this.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he had found his firstë mansión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He knew the remnant by proportión;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And knew the rising of his moonë well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in whose face, and term, and every deal;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And knew full well the moonë’s mansión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Accordant to his operatión;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And knew also his other observánces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For such illusións and such meschances,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3345" id="noteref-3345" epub:type="noteref">3345</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As heathen folk used in thilkë days.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which no longer made he delays;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But through his magic, for a day or tway,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3346" id="noteref-3346" epub:type="noteref">3346</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seemed all the rockës were away.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Aurelius, which yet despaired is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whe’er<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3347" id="noteref-3347" epub:type="noteref">3347</a> he shall have his love, or fare amiss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awaited night and day on this mirácle:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when he knew that there was none obstácle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That voided<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3348" id="noteref-3348" epub:type="noteref">3348</a> were these rockës every one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down at his master’s feet he fell anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said; “I, woeful wretch’d Aurelius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thank you, my Lord, and lady mine Venús,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That me have holpen from my carës cold.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the temple his way forth hath he hold’,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where as he knew he should his lady see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when he saw his time, anon right he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With dreadful<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3349" id="noteref-3349" epub:type="noteref">3349</a> heart and with full humble cheer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3350" id="noteref-3350" epub:type="noteref">3350</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saluteth hath his sovereign lady dear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My rightful Lady,” quoth this woeful man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Whom I most dread, and love as I best can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lothest were of all this world displease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were ’t not that I for you have such disease,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3351" id="noteref-3351" epub:type="noteref">3351</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I must die here at your foot anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nought would I tell how me is woebegone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But certes either must I die or plain;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3352" id="noteref-3352" epub:type="noteref">3352</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye slay me guiltëless for very pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But of my death though that ye have no ruth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Advisë you, ere that ye break your truth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Repentë you, for thilkë God above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere ye me slay because that I you love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, Madame, well ye wot what ye have hight;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3353" id="noteref-3353" epub:type="noteref">3353</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not that I challenge anything of right</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of you, my sovereign lady, but of grace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in a garden yond’, in such a place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye wot right well what ye behightë me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in mine hand your trothë plighted ye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To love me best; God wot ye saidë so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Albeit that I unworthy am thereto;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Madame, I speak it for th’ honoúr of you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than to save my heartë’s life right now;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have done so as ye commanded me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if ye vouchësafe, ye may go see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do as you list, have your behest in mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, quick or dead, right there ye shall me find;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In you lies all to do<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3354" id="noteref-3354" epub:type="noteref">3354</a> me live or dey;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3355" id="noteref-3355" epub:type="noteref">3355</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But well I wot the rockës be away.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He took his leave, and she astonish’d stood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all her face was not one drop of blood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She never ween’d t’ have come in such a trap.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Alas!” quoth she, “that ever this should hap!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ween’d I ne’er, by possibility,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That such a monster or marváil might be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is against the process of natúre.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And home she went a sorrowful creatúre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For very fear unnethës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3356" id="noteref-3356" epub:type="noteref">3356</a> may she go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She weeped, wailed, all a day or two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And swooned, that it ruthë was to see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But why it was, to no wight toldë she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For out of town was gone Arviragus.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to herself she spake, and saidë thus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With facë pale, and full sorrowful cheer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In her complaint, as ye shall after hear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Alas!” quoth she, “on thee, Fortúne, I plain,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3357" id="noteref-3357" epub:type="noteref">3357</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That unware hast me wrapped in thy chain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From which to scapë, wot I no succoúr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save only death, or ellës dishonoúr;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One of these two behoveth me to choose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But natheless, yet had I lever<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3358" id="noteref-3358" epub:type="noteref">3358</a> lose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My life, than of my body havë shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or know myselfë false, or lose my name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with my death I may be quit y-wis.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3359" id="noteref-3359" epub:type="noteref">3359</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath there not many a noble wife, ere this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many a maiden, slain herself, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rather than with her body do trespass?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes, certes; lo, these stories bear witnéss.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3360" id="noteref-3360" epub:type="noteref">3360</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>When thirty tyrants full of cursedness<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3361" id="noteref-3361" epub:type="noteref">3361</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had slain Phidon in Athens at the feast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They cómmanded his daughters to arrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bringë them before them, in despite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All naked, to fulfil their foul delight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in their father’s blood they made them dance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the pavement⁠—God give them mischance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which these woeful maidens, full of dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rather than they would lose their maidenhead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They privily be start<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3362" id="noteref-3362" epub:type="noteref">3362</a> into a well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drowned themselves, as the bookës tell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They of Messenë let inquire and seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Lacedaemon fifty maidens eke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On which they wouldë do their lechery:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there was none of all that company</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was not slain, and with a glad intent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chose rather for to die, than to assent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be oppressed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3363" id="noteref-3363" epub:type="noteref">3363</a> of her maidenhead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should I then to dien be in dread?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, eke the tyrant Aristoclides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That lov’d a maiden hight Stimphalides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that her father slain was on a night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto Diana’s temple went she right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3364" id="noteref-3364" epub:type="noteref">3364</a> the image in her handës two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From which imáge she wouldë never go;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No wight her handës might off it arace,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3365" id="noteref-3365" epub:type="noteref">3365</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till she was slain right in the selfë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3366" id="noteref-3366" epub:type="noteref">3366</a> place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now since that maidens haddë such despite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be defouled with man’s foul delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well ought a wife rather herself to slé,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3367" id="noteref-3367" epub:type="noteref">3367</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than be defouled, as it thinketh me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What shall I say of Hasdrubalë’s wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That at Carthage bereft herself of life?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, when she saw the Romans win the town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She took her children all, and skipt adown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the fire, and rather chose to die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than any Roman did her villainý.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath not Lucretia slain herself, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Romë, when that she oppressed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3368" id="noteref-3368" epub:type="noteref">3368</a> was</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Tarquin? for her thought it was a shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To livë, when she haddë lost her name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The seven maidens of Milesie also</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have slain themselves for very dread and woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rather than folk of Gaul them should oppress.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than a thousand stories, as I guess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could I now tell as touching this mattére.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Abradate was slain, his wife so dear<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3369" id="noteref-3369" epub:type="noteref">3369</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Herselfë slew, and let her blood to glide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Abradatë’s woundës, deep and wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said, ‘My body at the leastë way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There shall no wight defoul, if that I may.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should I more examples hereof sayn?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since that so many have themselvës slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well rather than they would defouled be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will conclude that it is bet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3370" id="noteref-3370" epub:type="noteref">3370</a> for me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To slay myself, than be defouled thus.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will be true unto Arviragus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ellës slay myself in some mannére,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As did Demotionë’s daughter dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because she wouldë not defouled be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Sedasus, it is full great pitý</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To readë how thy daughters died, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That slew themselves for suchë manner cas.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3371" id="noteref-3371" epub:type="noteref">3371</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As great a pity was it, or well more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Theban maiden, that for Nicanór</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Herselfë slew, right for such manner woe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another Theban maiden did right so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one of Macedon had her oppress’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She with her death her maidenhead redress’d.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3372" id="noteref-3372" epub:type="noteref">3372</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>What shall I say of Niceratus’ wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That for such case bereft herself her life?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How true was eke to Alcibiades</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His love, that for to dien rather chese,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3373" id="noteref-3373" epub:type="noteref">3373</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than for to suffer his body unburied be?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, what a wife was Alcesté?” quoth she.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What saith Homér of good Penelope?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All Greecë knoweth of her chastity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pardie, of Laodamía is written thus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That when at Troy was slain Protesilaus,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3374" id="noteref-3374" epub:type="noteref">3374</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>No longer would she live after his day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The same of noble Porcia tell I may;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Withoutë Brutus couldë she not live,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom she did all whole her heartë give.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3375" id="noteref-3375" epub:type="noteref">3375</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The perfect wifehood of Artemisie<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3376" id="noteref-3376" epub:type="noteref">3376</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Honoúred is throughout all Barbarie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Teuta<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3377" id="noteref-3377" epub:type="noteref">3377</a> queen, thy wifely chastitý</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To allë wivës may a mirror be.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3378" id="noteref-3378" epub:type="noteref">3378</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus plained Dorigen a day or tway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Purposing ever that she wouldë dey;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3379" id="noteref-3379" epub:type="noteref">3379</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But natheless upon the thirdë night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Home came Arviragus, the worthy knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And asked her why that she wept so sore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she gan weepen ever longer more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Alas,” quoth she, “that ever I was born!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus have I said,” quoth she; “thus have I sworn.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And told him all, as ye have heard before:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It needeth not rehearse it you no more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This husband with glad cheer,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3380" id="noteref-3380" epub:type="noteref">3380</a> in friendly wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Answér’d and said, as I shall you devise.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3381" id="noteref-3381" epub:type="noteref">3381</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Is there aught ellës, Dorigen, but this?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nay, nay,” quoth she, “God help me so, as wis<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3382" id="noteref-3382" epub:type="noteref">3382</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is too much, an’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3383" id="noteref-3383" epub:type="noteref">3383</a> it were Goddë’s will.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Yea, wife,” quoth he, “let sleepë what is still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It may be well par’venture yet to-day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye shall your trothë holdë, by my fay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, God so wisly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3384" id="noteref-3384" epub:type="noteref">3384</a> have mercý on me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I had well lever sticked for to be,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3385" id="noteref-3385" epub:type="noteref">3385</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For very lovë which I to you have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if ye should your trothë keep and save.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Truth is the highest thing that man may keep.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with that word he burst anon to weep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said; “I you forbid, on pain of death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That never, while you lasteth life or breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To no wight tell ye this misáventúre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I may best, I will my woe endure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor make no countenance of heaviness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That folk of you may deemë harm, or guess.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And forth he call’d a squiër and a maid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Go forth anon with Dorigen,” he said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“And bringë her to such a place anon.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They take their leave, and on their way they gon:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But they not wistë why she thither went;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would to no wight tellë his intent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This squiër, which that hight Aurelius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Dorigen that was so amorous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of áventúrë happen’d her to meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid the town, right in the quickest<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3386" id="noteref-3386" epub:type="noteref">3386</a> street,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As she was bound<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3387" id="noteref-3387" epub:type="noteref">3387</a> to go the way forthright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toward the garden, there as she had hight.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3388" id="noteref-3388" epub:type="noteref">3388</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he was to the garden-ward also;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For well he spiëd when she wouldë go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of her house, to any manner place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thus they met, of áventúre or grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he saluted her with glad intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And asked of her whitherward she went.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she answered, half as she were mad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Unto the garden, as my husband bade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My trothë for to hold, alas! alas!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aurelius gan to wonder on this case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his heart had great compassión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of her, and of her lamentatión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of Arviragus, the worthy knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That bade her hold all that she haddë hight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So loth him was his wife should break her truth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his heart he caught of it great ruth,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3389" id="noteref-3389" epub:type="noteref">3389</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Considering the best on every side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That from his lust yet were him lever<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3390" id="noteref-3390" epub:type="noteref">3390</a> abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than do so high a churlish wretchedness<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3391" id="noteref-3391" epub:type="noteref">3391</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against franchise,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3392" id="noteref-3392" epub:type="noteref">3392</a> and allë gentleness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which in fewë words he saidë thus;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Madame, say to your lord Arviragus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That since I see the greatë gentleness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of him, and eke I see well your distress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That him were lever<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3393" id="noteref-3393" epub:type="noteref">3393</a> have shame (and that were ruth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3394" id="noteref-3394" epub:type="noteref">3394</a>)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than ye to me should breakë thus your truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I had well lever aye to suffer woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than to depart<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3395" id="noteref-3395" epub:type="noteref">3395</a> the love betwixt you two.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I you release, Madame, into your hond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quit ev’ry surëment<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3396" id="noteref-3396" epub:type="noteref">3396</a> and ev’ry bond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ye have made to me as herebeforn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since thilkë timë that ye werë born.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have here my truth, I shall you ne’er repreve<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3397" id="noteref-3397" epub:type="noteref">3397</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of no behest;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3398" id="noteref-3398" epub:type="noteref">3398</a> and here I take my leave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As of the truest and the bestë wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ever yet I knew in all my life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But every wife beware of her behest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Dorigen remember at the least.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus can a squiër do a gentle deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As well as can a knight, withoutë drede.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3399" id="noteref-3399" epub:type="noteref">3399</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She thanked him upon her kneës bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And home unto her husband is she fare,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3400" id="noteref-3400" epub:type="noteref">3400</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And told him all, as ye have heardë said;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, trustë me, he was so well apaid,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3401" id="noteref-3401" epub:type="noteref">3401</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it were impossíble me to write.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should I longer of this case indite?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arviragus and Dorigen his wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sov’reign blissë leddë forth their life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne’er after was there anger them between;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He cherish’d her as though she were a queen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she was to him true for evermore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of these two folk ye get of me no more.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Aurelius, that his cost had all forlorn,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3402" id="noteref-3402" epub:type="noteref">3402</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cursed the time that ever he was born.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Alas!” quoth he, “alas that I behight<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3403" id="noteref-3403" epub:type="noteref">3403</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of pured<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3404" id="noteref-3404" epub:type="noteref">3404</a> gold a thousand pound of weight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To this philosopher! how shall I do?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see no more, but that I am fordo.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3405" id="noteref-3405" epub:type="noteref">3405</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine heritagë must I needës sell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And be a beggar; here I will not dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shamen all my kindred in this place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3406" id="noteref-3406" epub:type="noteref">3406</a> I of him may gettë better grace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But natheless I will of him assay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At certain dayës year by year to pay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thank him of his greatë courtesy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My trothë will I keep, I will not lie.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With heartë sore he went unto his coffer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And broughtë gold unto this philosópher,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The value of five hundred pound, I guess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And him beseeched, of his gentleness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To grant him dayës of<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3407" id="noteref-3407" epub:type="noteref">3407</a> the remenant;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said; “Master, I dare well make avaunt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I failed never of my truth as yet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For sickerly my debtë shall be quit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towardës you how so that e’er I fare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To go a-begging in my kirtle bare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But would ye vouchësafe, upon suretý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two year, or three, for to respitë me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then were I well, for ellës must I sell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine heritage; there is no more to tell.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This philosópher soberly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3408" id="noteref-3408" epub:type="noteref">3408</a> answér’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saidë thus, when he these wordës heard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Have I not holden covenant to thee?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Yes, certes, well and truëly,” quoth he.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Hast thou not had thy lady as thee liked?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“No, no,” quoth he, and sorrowfully siked.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3409" id="noteref-3409" epub:type="noteref">3409</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What was the causë? tell me if thou can.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aurelius his tale anon began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And told him all as ye have heard before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It needeth not to you rehearse it more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said, “Arviragus of gentleness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had lever<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3410" id="noteref-3410" epub:type="noteref">3410</a> die in sorrow and distress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than that his wife were of her trothë false.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sorrow of Dorigen he told him als’,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3411" id="noteref-3411" epub:type="noteref">3411</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>How loth her was to be a wicked wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that she lever had lost that day her life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that her troth she swore through innocénce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She ne’er erst<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3412" id="noteref-3412" epub:type="noteref">3412</a> had heard speak of apparence;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3413" id="noteref-3413" epub:type="noteref">3413</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That made me have of her so great pitý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And right as freely as he sent her to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As freely sent I her to him again:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is all and some, there is no more to sayn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The philosópher answer’d; “Levë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3414" id="noteref-3414" epub:type="noteref">3414</a> brother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Evereach of you did gently to the other;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art a squiër, and he is a knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But God forbiddë, for his blissful might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if a clerk could do a gentle deed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As well as any of you, it is no drede.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3415" id="noteref-3415" epub:type="noteref">3415</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sir, I releasë thee thy thousand pound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thou right now were crept out of the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor ever ere now haddest knowen me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, Sir, I will not take a penny of thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all my craft, nor naught for my travail;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3416" id="noteref-3416" epub:type="noteref">3416</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast y-payed well for my vitáille;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is enough; and farewell, have good day.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And took his horse, and forth he went his way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lordings, this question would I askë now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which was the mostë free,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3417" id="noteref-3417" epub:type="noteref">3417</a> as thinketh you?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now tellë me, ere that ye farther wend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I can<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3418" id="noteref-3418" epub:type="noteref">3418</a> no more, my tale is at an end.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
