<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Prioress’s Tale</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-prioresss-tale" epub:type="division z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Prioress’s Tale</h2>
			<section id="the-prioresss-tale-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Prologue</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Well said, by <i xml:lang="la">corpus Domini</i>,” quoth our Host;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now longë may’st thou sailë by the coast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou gentle Master, gentle Marinére.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God give the monk a thousand last quad year!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3785" id="noteref-3785" epub:type="noteref">3785</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aha! fellows, beware of such a jape.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3786" id="noteref-3786" epub:type="noteref">3786</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The monk put in the mannë’s hood an ape,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3787" id="noteref-3787" epub:type="noteref">3787</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his wifë’s eke, by Saint Austin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drawë no monkës more into your inn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now pass over, and let us seek about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who shall now tellë first of all this rout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another tale;” and with that word he said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As courteously as it had been a maid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My Lady Prioressë, by your leave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that I wist I shouldë you not grieve,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3788" id="noteref-3788" epub:type="noteref">3788</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wouldë deemë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3789" id="noteref-3789" epub:type="noteref">3789</a> that ye tellë should</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A talë next, if so were that ye would.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now will ye vouchësafe, my lady dear?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Gladly,” quoth she; and said as ye shall hear.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-prioresss-tale-main" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Tale<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3790" id="noteref-3790" epub:type="noteref">3790</a></h3>
				<p>
					<span>O Lord our Lord! thy name how marvellous</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is in this largë world y-spread!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3791" id="noteref-3791" epub:type="noteref">3791</a> (quoth she)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For not only thy laudë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3792" id="noteref-3792" epub:type="noteref">3792</a> precious</span>
					<br/>
					<span id="the-prioresss-tale-line-22">Performed is by men of high degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But by the mouth of children thy bounté</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Performed is, for on the breast sucking</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimës showë they thy herying.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3793" id="noteref-3793" epub:type="noteref">3793</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Wherefore in laud, as I best can or may</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thee, and of the whitë lily flow’r</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which that thee bare, and is a maid alway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tell a story I will do my laboúr;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not that I may increasë her honoúr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she herselven is honoúr and root</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of bounté,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3794" id="noteref-3794" epub:type="noteref">3794</a> next her son, and soulës’ boot.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3795" id="noteref-3795" epub:type="noteref">3795</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O mother maid, O maid and mother free!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3796" id="noteref-3796" epub:type="noteref">3796</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>O bush unburnt, burning in Moses’ sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ravished’st down from the deity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through thy humbless, the ghost that in thee light;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3797" id="noteref-3797" epub:type="noteref">3797</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of whose virtúe, when he thine heartë light,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3798" id="noteref-3798" epub:type="noteref">3798</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conceived was the Father’s sapience;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Help me to tell it to thy reverence.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lady! thy bounty, thy magnificence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy virtue, and thy great humility,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There may no tongue express in no science:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For sometimes, Lady! ere men pray to thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou go’st before, of thy benignity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gettest us the light, through thy prayére,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To guiden us unto thy son so dear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>My conning<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3799" id="noteref-3799" epub:type="noteref">3799</a> is so weak, O blissful queen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For to declarë thy great worthiness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I not may the weight of it sustene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as a child of twelvemonth old, or less,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That can unnethës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3800" id="noteref-3800" epub:type="noteref">3800</a> any word express,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right so fare I; and therefore, I you pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Guidë my song that I shall of you say.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>There was in Asia, in a great citý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amongës Christian folk, a Jewery,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3801" id="noteref-3801" epub:type="noteref">3801</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sustained by a lord of that countrý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For foul usure, and lucre of villainy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hateful to Christ, and to his company;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And through the street men mightë ride and wend,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3802" id="noteref-3802" epub:type="noteref">3802</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For it was free, and open at each end.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A little school of Christian folk there stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down at the farther end, in which there were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Children an heap y-come of Christian blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That learned in that schoolë year by year</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such manner doctrine as men used there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is to say, to singen and to read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As smallë children do in their childhead.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Among these children was a widow’s son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little clergion,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3803" id="noteref-3803" epub:type="noteref">3803</a> seven year of age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That day by day to scholay was his won,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3804" id="noteref-3804" epub:type="noteref">3804</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke also, whereso he saw th’ image</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Christë’s mother, had he in uságe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As him was taught, to kneel adown, and say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ave Maria, as he went by the way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus had this widow her little son y-taught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our blissful Lady, Christë’s mother dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To worship aye, and he forgot it not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For sely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3805" id="noteref-3805" epub:type="noteref">3805</a> child will always soonë lear.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3806" id="noteref-3806" epub:type="noteref">3806</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But aye when I remember on this mattére,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saint Nicholas<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3807" id="noteref-3807" epub:type="noteref">3807</a> stands ever in my presence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he so young to Christ did reverence.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This little child his little book learning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he sat in the school at his primére,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He <i xml:lang="la">Alma redemptoris</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3808" id="noteref-3808" epub:type="noteref">3808</a> heardë sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As children learned their antiphonere;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3809" id="noteref-3809" epub:type="noteref">3809</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as he durst, he drew him nere and nere,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3810" id="noteref-3810" epub:type="noteref">3810</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hearken’d aye the wordës and the note,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till he the firstë verse knew all by rote.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nought wist he what this Latin was to say,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3811" id="noteref-3811" epub:type="noteref">3811</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he so young and tender was of age;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But on a day his fellow gan he pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To éxpound him this song in his languáge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or tell him why this song was in uságe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This pray’d he him to construe and declare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full oftentime upon his kneës bare.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His fellow, which that elder was than he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Answér’d him thus: “This song, I have heard say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was maked of our blissful Lady free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her to salute, and ekë her to pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be our help and succour when we dey.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3812" id="noteref-3812" epub:type="noteref">3812</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I can no more expound in this mattére:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I learnë song, I know but small grammére.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And is this song y-made in reverence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Christë’s mother?” said this innocent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now certes I will do my diligence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To conne<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3813" id="noteref-3813" epub:type="noteref">3813</a> it all, ere Christëmas be went;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though that I for my primer shall be shent,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3814" id="noteref-3814" epub:type="noteref">3814</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shall be beaten thriës in an hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will it conne, our Lady to honoúr.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>His fellow taught him homeward<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3815" id="noteref-3815" epub:type="noteref">3815</a> privily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From day to day, till he coud<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3816" id="noteref-3816" epub:type="noteref">3816</a> it by rote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then he sang it well and boldëly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From word to word according with the note;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twice in a day it passed through his throat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To schoolë-ward, and homeward when he went;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Christ’s mother was set all his intent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As I have said, throughout the Jewery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This little child, as he came to and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full merrily then would he sing and cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i xml:lang="la">O Alma redemptoris</i>, evermo’;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sweetness hath his heartë pierced so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Christë’s mother, that to her to pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He cannot stint<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3817" id="noteref-3817" epub:type="noteref">3817</a> of singing by the way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Our firstë foe, the serpent Satanas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hath in Jewës’ heart his waspë’s nest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upswell’d and said, “O Hebrew people, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is this to you a thing that is honést,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3818" id="noteref-3818" epub:type="noteref">3818</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That such a boy shall walken as him lest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In your despite, and sing of such senténce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which is against your lawë’s reverence?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From thencëforth the Jewës have conspired</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This innocent out of the world to chase;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A homicidë thereto have they hired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in an alley had a privy place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as the child gan forth by for to pace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This cursed Jew him hent,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3819" id="noteref-3819" epub:type="noteref">3819</a> and held him fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cut his throat, and in a pit him cast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I say that in a wardrobe<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3820" id="noteref-3820" epub:type="noteref">3820</a> they him threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where as the Jewës purged their entrail.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O cursed folk! O Herodës all new!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What may your evil intentë you avail?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Murder will out, certáin it will not fail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And namely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3821" id="noteref-3821" epub:type="noteref">3821</a> where th’ honoúr of God shall spread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blood out crieth on your cursed deed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O martyr souded<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3822" id="noteref-3822" epub:type="noteref">3822</a> to virginity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now may’st thou sing, and follow ever-in-one<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3823" id="noteref-3823" epub:type="noteref">3823</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whitë Lamb celestial (quoth she),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which the great Evangelist Saint John</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Patmos wrote, which saith that they that gon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before this Lamb, and sing a song all new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That never fleshly woman they ne knew.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3824" id="noteref-3824" epub:type="noteref">3824</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This poorë widow waited all that night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After her little child, but he came not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which, as soon as it was dayë’s light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With facë pale, in dread and busy thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She hath at school and ellëswhere him sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till finally she gan so far espy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he was last seen in the Jewerý.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With mother’s pity in her breast enclosed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She went, as she were half out of her mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To every placë, where she hath supposed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By likelihood her little child to find:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever on Christ’s mother meek and kind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She cried, and at the lastë thus she wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the cursed Jewës she him sought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She freined,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3825" id="noteref-3825" epub:type="noteref">3825</a> and she prayed piteously</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To every Jew that dwelled in that place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tell her, if her childë went thereby;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They saidë, “Nay;” but Jesus of his grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave in her thought, within a little space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in that place after her son she cried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where he was cast into a pit beside.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O greatë God, that pérformest thy laud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By mouth of innocents, lo here thy might!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This gem of chastity, this emeraud,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3826" id="noteref-3826" epub:type="noteref">3826</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke of martyrdom the ruby bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where he with throat y-carven<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3827" id="noteref-3827" epub:type="noteref">3827</a> lay upright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He <i xml:lang="la">Alma redemptoris</i> gan to sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So loud, that all the place began to ring.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Christian folk, that through the streetë went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In camë, for to wonder on this thing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hastily they for the provost sent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He came anon withoutë tarrying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heried<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3828" id="noteref-3828" epub:type="noteref">3828</a> Christ, that is of heaven king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke his mother, honour of mankind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after that the Jewës let<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3829" id="noteref-3829" epub:type="noteref">3829</a> he bind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With torment, and with shameful death each one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The provost did<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3830" id="noteref-3830" epub:type="noteref">3830</a> these Jewës for to sterve<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3831" id="noteref-3831" epub:type="noteref">3831</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of this murder wist, and that anon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wouldë no such cursedness observe;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3832" id="noteref-3832" epub:type="noteref">3832</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Evil shall have that evil will deserve;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore with horses wild he did them draw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after that he hung them by the law.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The child, with piteous lamentatión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was taken up, singing his song alway:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with honoúr and great processión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They carry him unto the next abbay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His mother swooning by the bierë lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unnethës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3833" id="noteref-3833" epub:type="noteref">3833</a> might the people that were there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This newë Rachel bringë from his bier.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Upon his bierë lay this innocent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the altar while the massë last’;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3834" id="noteref-3834" epub:type="noteref">3834</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, after that, th’ abbót with his convént</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have sped them for to bury him full fast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when they holy water on him cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet spake this child, when sprinkled was the water,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sang, <i xml:lang="la">O Alma redemptoris mater!</i></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This abbot, which that was a holy man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As monkës be, or ellës ought to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This youngë child to conjure he began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said; “O dearë child! I halsë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3835" id="noteref-3835" epub:type="noteref">3835</a> thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In virtue of the holy Trinity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell me what is thy cause for to sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since that thy throat is cut, to my seemíng.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“My throat is cut unto my neckë-bone,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saidë this child, “and, as by way of kind,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3836" id="noteref-3836" epub:type="noteref">3836</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I should have diëd, yea long time agone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Jesus Christ, as ye in bookës find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will that his glory last and be in mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, for the worship<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3837" id="noteref-3837" epub:type="noteref">3837</a> of his mother dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet may I sing <i xml:lang="la">O Alma</i> loud and clear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“This well<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3838" id="noteref-3838" epub:type="noteref">3838</a> of mercy, Christë’s mother sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I loved alway, after my conníng:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3839" id="noteref-3839" epub:type="noteref">3839</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when that I my lifë should forlete,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3840" id="noteref-3840" epub:type="noteref">3840</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me she came, and bade me for to sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This anthem verily in my dying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ye have heard; and, when that I had sung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me thought she laid a grain upon my tongue.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Wherefore I sing, and sing I must certáin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In honour of that blissful maiden free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till from my tongue off taken is the grain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after that thus saidë she to me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘My little child, then will I fetchë thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that the grain is from thy tonguë take:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be not aghast,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3841" id="noteref-3841" epub:type="noteref">3841</a> I will thee not forsake.’ ”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This holy monk, this abbot him mean I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His tongue out caught, and took away the grain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he gave up the ghost full softëly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when this abbot had this wonder seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His saltë tearës trickled down as rain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And groff<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3842" id="noteref-3842" epub:type="noteref">3842</a> he fell all flat upon the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still he lay, as he had been y-bound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The convent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3843" id="noteref-3843" epub:type="noteref">3843</a> lay eke on the pavëment</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weeping, and herying<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3844" id="noteref-3844" epub:type="noteref">3844</a> Christ’s mother dear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after that they rose, and forth they went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And took away this martyr from his bier,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in a tomb of marble stonës clear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enclosed they his little body sweet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where he is now, God lene<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3845" id="noteref-3845" epub:type="noteref">3845</a> us for to meet.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O youngë Hugh of Lincoln!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3846" id="noteref-3846" epub:type="noteref">3846</a> slain also</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With cursed Jewës⁠—as it is notáble,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For it is but a little while ago⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pray eke for us, we sinful folk unstable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, of his mercy, God so merciáble<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3847" id="noteref-3847" epub:type="noteref">3847</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>On us his greatë mercy multiply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For reverence of his mother Marý.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
