<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Manciple’s Tale</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-manciples-tale" epub:type="division z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Manciple’s Tale</h2>
			<section id="the-manciples-tale-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Prologue</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Weet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4913" id="noteref-4913" epub:type="noteref">4913</a> ye not where there stands a little town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which that y-called is Bob-up-and-down,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4914" id="noteref-4914" epub:type="noteref">4914</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the Blee, in Canterbury way?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There gan our Hostë for to jape and play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saidë, “Sirs, what? Dun is in the mire.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4915" id="noteref-4915" epub:type="noteref">4915</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is there no man, for prayer nor for hire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That will awaken our fellów behind?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thief him might full lightly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4916" id="noteref-4916" epub:type="noteref">4916</a> rob and bind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See how he nappeth, see, for cockë’s bones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he would fallë from his horse at ones.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is that a Cook of London,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4917" id="noteref-4917" epub:type="noteref">4917</a> with mischance?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4918" id="noteref-4918" epub:type="noteref">4918</a> him come forth, he knoweth his penánce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he shall tell a talë, by my fay,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4919" id="noteref-4919" epub:type="noteref">4919</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although it be not worth a bottle hay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awake, thou Cook,” quoth he; “God give thee sorrow!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What aileth thee to sleepë by the morrow?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4920" id="noteref-4920" epub:type="noteref">4920</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hast thou had fleas all night, or art drunk?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or had thou with some quean all night y-swunk,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4921" id="noteref-4921" epub:type="noteref">4921</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that thou mayest not hold up thine head?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Cook, that was full pale and nothing red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said to Host, “So God my soulë bless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As there is fall’n on me such heaviness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know not why, that me were lever<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4922" id="noteref-4922" epub:type="noteref">4922</a> sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than the best gallon wine that is in Cheap.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Well,” quoth the Manciple, “if it may do ease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thee, Sir Cook, and to no wight displease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which that here rideth in this company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that our Host will of his courtesy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will as now excuse thee of thy tale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in good faith thy visage is full pale:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine eyen dazë,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4923" id="noteref-4923" epub:type="noteref">4923</a> soothly as me thinketh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And well I wot, thy breath full sourë stinketh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That sheweth well thou art not well disposed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of me certáin thou shalt not be y-glosed.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4924" id="noteref-4924" epub:type="noteref">4924</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>See how he yawneth, lo, this drunken wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As though he would us swallow anon right.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hold close thy mouth, man, by thy father’s kin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The devil of hellë set his foot therein!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy cursed breath infectë will us all:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fy! stinking swine, fy! foul may thee befall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! takë heed, Sirs, of this lusty man.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, sweetë Sir, will ye joust at the fan?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4925" id="noteref-4925" epub:type="noteref">4925</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereto, me thinketh, ye be well y-shape.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I trow that ye have drunken wine of ape,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4926" id="noteref-4926" epub:type="noteref">4926</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that is when men playë with a straw.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And with this speech the Cook waxed all wraw,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4927" id="noteref-4927" epub:type="noteref">4927</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the Manciple he gan nod fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For lack of speech; and down his horse him cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where as he lay, till that men him up took.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This was a fair chevachie<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4928" id="noteref-4928" epub:type="noteref">4928</a> of a cook:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! that he had held him by his ladle!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ere that he again were in the saddle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was great shoving bothë to and fro</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lift him up, and muchë care and woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So unwieldy was this silly paled ghost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the Manciple then spake our Host:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Because that drink hath dominatión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon this man, by my salvatión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I trow he lewëdly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4929" id="noteref-4929" epub:type="noteref">4929</a> will tell his tale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For were it wine, or old or moisty<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4930" id="noteref-4930" epub:type="noteref">4930</a> ale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he hath drunk, he speaketh in his nose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sneezeth fast, and eke he hath the pose.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4931" id="noteref-4931" epub:type="noteref">4931</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He also hath to do more than enough</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To keep him on his capel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4932" id="noteref-4932" epub:type="noteref">4932</a> out of the slough;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if he fall from off his capel eftsoon,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4933" id="noteref-4933" epub:type="noteref">4933</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then shall we allë have enough to do’n</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In lifting up his heavy drunken corse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell on thy tale, of him make I no force.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4934" id="noteref-4934" epub:type="noteref">4934</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But yet, Manciple, in faith thou art too nice<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4935" id="noteref-4935" epub:type="noteref">4935</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus openly to reprove him of his vice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another day he will paráventúre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reclaimë thee, and bring thee to the lure;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4936" id="noteref-4936" epub:type="noteref">4936</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I mean, he speakë will of smallë things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As for to pinchen at<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4937" id="noteref-4937" epub:type="noteref">4937</a> thy reckonings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That were not honest, if it came to prefe.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4938" id="noteref-4938" epub:type="noteref">4938</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Quoth the Manciple, “That were a great mischíef;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So might he lightly bring me in the snare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet had I lever<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4939" id="noteref-4939" epub:type="noteref">4939</a> payë for the mare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which he rides on, than he should with me strive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will not wrathë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4940" id="noteref-4940" epub:type="noteref">4940</a> him, so may I thrive)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That that I spake, I said it in my bourde.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4941" id="noteref-4941" epub:type="noteref">4941</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And weet ye what? I have here in my gourd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A draught of wine, yea, of a ripë grape,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And right anon ye shall see a good jape.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4942" id="noteref-4942" epub:type="noteref">4942</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Cook shall drink thereof, if that I may;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On pain of my life he will not say nay.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And certainly, to tellen as it was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this vessél the cook drank fast (alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What needed it? he drank enough beforn),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when he haddë pouped in his horn,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4943" id="noteref-4943" epub:type="noteref">4943</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the Manciple he took the gourd again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of that drink the Cook was wondrous fain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thanked him in such wise as he could.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then gan our Host to laughë wondrous loud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said, “I see well it is necessary</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where that we go good drink with us to carry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that will turnë rancour and disease<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4944" id="noteref-4944" epub:type="noteref">4944</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>T’ accord and love, and many a wrong appease.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Bacchus, Bacchus, blessed be thy name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That so canst turnen earnest into game!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Worship and thank be to thy deity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that mattére ye get no more of me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell on thy tale, Manciple, I thee pray.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Well, Sir,” quoth he, “now hearken what I say.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-manciples-tale-body" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Tale<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4945" id="noteref-4945" epub:type="noteref">4945</a></h3>
				<p>
					<span>When Phoebus dwelled here in earth adown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As oldë bookës makë mentioún,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was the mostë lusty<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4946" id="noteref-4946" epub:type="noteref">4946</a> bachelér</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all this world, and eke the best archér.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He slew Python the serpent, as he lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sleeping against the sun upon a day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many another noble worthy deed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He with his bow wrought, as men mayë read.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Playen he could on every minstrelsy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And singë, that it was a melody</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hearen of his clearë voice the soun’.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Certes the king of Thebes, Amphioún,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That with his singing walled the citý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could never singë half so well as he.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereto he was the seemliestë man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is, or was since that the world began;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What needeth it his features to descrive?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in this world is none so fair alive.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was therewith full fill’d of gentleness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of honour, and of perfect worthiness.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This Phoebus, that was flower of bach’lery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As well in freedom<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4947" id="noteref-4947" epub:type="noteref">4947</a> as in chivalry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For his disport, in sign eke of victóry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Python, so as telleth us the story,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was wont to bearen in his hand a bow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now had this Phoebus in his house a crow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which in a cage he foster’d many a day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And taught it speaken, as men teach a jay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>White was this crow, as is a snow-white swan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And counterfeit the speech of every man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He couldë, when he shouldë tell a tale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therewith in all this world no nightingale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne couldë by an hundred thousand deal<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4948" id="noteref-4948" epub:type="noteref">4948</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Singë so wondrous merrily and well.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now had this Phoebus in his house a wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which that he loved morë than his life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And night and day did ever his diligence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her for to please, and do her reverence:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save only, if that I the sooth shall sayn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jealous he was, and would have kept her fain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For him were loth y-japed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4949" id="noteref-4949" epub:type="noteref">4949</a> for to be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so is every wight in such degree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all for nought, for it availeth nought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A good wife, that is clean of work and thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should not be kept in none await<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4950" id="noteref-4950" epub:type="noteref">4950</a> certáin:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And truëly the labour is in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To keep a shrewë,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4951" id="noteref-4951" epub:type="noteref">4951</a> for it will not be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This hold I for a very nicety,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4952" id="noteref-4952" epub:type="noteref">4952</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To spillë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4953" id="noteref-4953" epub:type="noteref">4953</a> labour for to keepë wives;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus writen oldë clerkës in their lives.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But now to purpose, as I first began.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This worthy Phoebus did all that he can</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pleasë her, weening, through such pleasánce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for his manhood and his governánce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That no man should have put him from her grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, God it wot, there may no man embrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As to distrain<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4954" id="noteref-4954" epub:type="noteref">4954</a> a thing, which that natúre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath naturally set in a creatúre.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take any bird, and put it in a cage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And do all thine intent, and thy coráge,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4955" id="noteref-4955" epub:type="noteref">4955</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To foster it tenderly with meat and drink</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of allë dainties that thou canst bethink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And keep it all so cleanly as thou may;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although the cage of gold be never so gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet had this bird, by twenty thousand fold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lever<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4956" id="noteref-4956" epub:type="noteref">4956</a> in a forést, both wild and cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go eatë wormës, and such wretchedness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ever this bird will do his business</span>
					<br/>
					<span>T’ escape out of his cage when that he may:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His liberty the bird desireth aye.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4957" id="noteref-4957" epub:type="noteref">4957</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let take a cat, and foster her with milk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tender flesh, and make her couch of silk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let her see a mouse go by the wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon she weiveth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4958" id="noteref-4958" epub:type="noteref">4958</a> milk, and flesh, and all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every dainty that is in that house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such appetite hath she to eat the mouse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, here hath kind<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4959" id="noteref-4959" epub:type="noteref">4959</a> her dominatin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And appetite flemeth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4960" id="noteref-4960" epub:type="noteref">4960</a> discretión.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A she-wolf hath also a villain’s kind;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4961" id="noteref-4961" epub:type="noteref">4961</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lewedestë wolf that she may find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or least of reputation, will she take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In timë when her lust<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4962" id="noteref-4962" epub:type="noteref">4962</a> to have a make.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4963" id="noteref-4963" epub:type="noteref">4963</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>All these examples speak I by<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4964" id="noteref-4964" epub:type="noteref">4964</a> these men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That be untrue, and nothing by womén.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For men have ever a lik’rous appetite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On lower things to pérform their delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than on their wivës, be they never so fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never so truë, nor so debonair.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4965" id="noteref-4965" epub:type="noteref">4965</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flesh is so newëfangled, with mischance,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4966" id="noteref-4966" epub:type="noteref">4966</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That we can in no thingë have pleasánce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That souneth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4967" id="noteref-4967" epub:type="noteref">4967</a> unto virtue any while.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This Phoebus, which that thought upon no guile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deceived was for all his jollitý;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For under him another haddë she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A man of little reputatión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nought worth to Phoebus in comparison.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The more harm is; it happens often so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which there cometh muchë harm and woe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so befell, when Phoebus was absént,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His wife anon hath for her leman<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4968" id="noteref-4968" epub:type="noteref">4968</a> sent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her leman! certes that is a knavish speech.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgive it me, and that I you beseech.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wisë Plato saith, as ye may read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The word must needs accordë with the deed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If men shall tellë properly a thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The word must cousin be to the workíng.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am a boistous<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4969" id="noteref-4969" epub:type="noteref">4969</a> man, right thus I say.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no differencë truëly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betwixt a wife that is of high degree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(If of her body dishonést she be),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And any poorë wench, other than this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(If it so be they workë both amiss),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, for<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4970" id="noteref-4970" epub:type="noteref">4970</a> the gentle is in estate above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She shall be call’d his lady and his love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, for that other is a poor womán,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She shall be call’d his wench and his lemán:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And God it wot, mine owen dearë brother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men lay the one as low as lies the other.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right so betwixt a titleless tyránt<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4971" id="noteref-4971" epub:type="noteref">4971</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And an outlaw, or else a thief erránt,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4972" id="noteref-4972" epub:type="noteref">4972</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The same I say, there is no differénce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(To Alexander told was this senténce),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, for the tyrant is of greater might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By force of meinie<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4973" id="noteref-4973" epub:type="noteref">4973</a> for to slay downright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And burn both house and home, and make all plain,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4974" id="noteref-4974" epub:type="noteref">4974</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, therefore is he call’d a capitáin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, for the outlaw hath but small meinie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And may not do so great an harm as he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor bring a country to so great mischíef,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men callë him an outlaw or a thief.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, for I am a man not textuel,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4975" id="noteref-4975" epub:type="noteref">4975</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will not tell of texts never a deal;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4976" id="noteref-4976" epub:type="noteref">4976</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will go to my tale, as I began.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When Phoebus’ wife had sent for her lemán,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon they wroughten all their lust volage.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4977" id="noteref-4977" epub:type="noteref">4977</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>This whitë crow, that hung aye in the cage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beheld their work, and said never a word;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when that home was come Phoebus the lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This crowë sung, “Cuckoo, cuckoo, cuckoo!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What? bird,” quoth Phoebus, “what song sing’st thou now?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wert thou not wont so merrily to sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That to my heart it was a réjoicíng</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hear thy voice? alas! what song is this?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“By God,” quoth he, “I singë not amiss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Phoebus,” quoth he, “for all thy worthiness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all thy beauty, and all thy gentleness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all thy song, and all thy minstrelsý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all thy waiting,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4978" id="noteref-4978" epub:type="noteref">4978</a> bleared is thine eye<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4979" id="noteref-4979" epub:type="noteref">4979</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>With one of little reputatión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not worth to thee, as in comparison,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mountance<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4980" id="noteref-4980" epub:type="noteref">4980</a> of a gnat, so may I thrive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For on thy bed thy wife I saw him swive.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What will ye more? the crow anon him told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By sadë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4981" id="noteref-4981" epub:type="noteref">4981</a> tokens, and by wordës bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How that his wife had done her lechery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To his great shame and his great villainy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And told him oft, he saw it with his eyen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Phoebus gan awayward for to wrien;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4982" id="noteref-4982" epub:type="noteref">4982</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him thought his woeful heartë burst in two.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His bow he bent, and set therein a flo,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4983" id="noteref-4983" epub:type="noteref">4983</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his ire he hath his wifë slain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is th’ effect, there is no more to sayn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For sorrow of which he brake his minstrelsy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both harp and lute, gitérn<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4984" id="noteref-4984" epub:type="noteref">4984</a> and psaltery;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke he brake his arrows and his bow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after that thus spake he to the crow.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Traitor,” quoth he, “with tongue of scorpión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast me brought to my confusión;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas that I was wrought!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4985" id="noteref-4985" epub:type="noteref">4985</a> why n’ere<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4986" id="noteref-4986" epub:type="noteref">4986</a> I dead?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O dearë wife, O gem of lustihead,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4987" id="noteref-4987" epub:type="noteref">4987</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That wert to me so sad,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4988" id="noteref-4988" epub:type="noteref">4988</a> and eke so true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now liest thou dead, with facë pale of hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full guiltëless, that durst I swear y-wis!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4989" id="noteref-4989" epub:type="noteref">4989</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>O rakel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4990" id="noteref-4990" epub:type="noteref">4990</a> hand, to do so foul amiss!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4991" id="noteref-4991" epub:type="noteref">4991</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>O troubled wit, O irë reckëless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That unadvised smit’st the guiltëless!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O wantrust,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4992" id="noteref-4992" epub:type="noteref">4992</a> full of false suspición!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where was thy wit and thy discretión?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O! every man beware of rakelness,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4993" id="noteref-4993" epub:type="noteref">4993</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor trow<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4994" id="noteref-4994" epub:type="noteref">4994</a> no thing withoutë strong witnéss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smite not too soon, ere that ye weetë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4995" id="noteref-4995" epub:type="noteref">4995</a> why,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And be advised<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4996" id="noteref-4996" epub:type="noteref">4996</a> well and sickerly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4997" id="noteref-4997" epub:type="noteref">4997</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere ye do any executión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon your irë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4998" id="noteref-4998" epub:type="noteref">4998</a> for suspición.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! a thousand folk hath rakel ire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Foully fordone, and brought them in the mire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! for sorrow I will myselfë slé.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4999" id="noteref-4999" epub:type="noteref">4999</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the crow, “O falsë thief,” said he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I will thee quite anon thy falsë tale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou sung whilom<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5000" id="noteref-5000" epub:type="noteref">5000</a> like any nightingale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now shalt thou, falsë thief, thy song foregon,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5001" id="noteref-5001" epub:type="noteref">5001</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke thy whitë feathers every one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor ever in all thy lifë shalt thou speak;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus shall men on a traitor be awreak.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5002" id="noteref-5002" epub:type="noteref">5002</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou and thine offspring ever shall be blake,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5003" id="noteref-5003" epub:type="noteref">5003</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor ever sweetë noisë shall ye make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ever cry against<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5004" id="noteref-5004" epub:type="noteref">5004</a> tempést and rain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In token that through thee my wife is slain.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the crow he start,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5005" id="noteref-5005" epub:type="noteref">5005</a> and that anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pull’d his whitë feathers every one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made him black, and reft him all his song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke his speech, and out at door him flung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the devil, which I him betake;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5006" id="noteref-5006" epub:type="noteref">5006</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for this causë be all crowës blake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lordings, by this ensample, I you pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beware, and takë keep<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5007" id="noteref-5007" epub:type="noteref">5007</a> what that ye say;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor tellë never man in all your life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How that another man hath dight his wife;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He will you hatë mortally certáin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dan Solomon, as wisë clerkës sayn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Teacheth a man to keep his tonguë well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, as I said, I am not textuel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But natheless thus taughtë me my dame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My son, think on the crow, in Goddë’s name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My son, keep well thy tongue, and keep thy friend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wicked tongue is worse than is a fiend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sonë, from a fiend men may them bless.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5008" id="noteref-5008" epub:type="noteref">5008</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>My son, God of his endëless goodnéss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wallëd a tongue with teeth, and lippës eke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5009" id="noteref-5009" epub:type="noteref">5009</a> man should him advisë,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5010" id="noteref-5010" epub:type="noteref">5010</a> what he speak.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My son, full often for too muchë speech</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath many a man been spilt,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5011" id="noteref-5011" epub:type="noteref">5011</a> as clerkës teach;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for a little speech advisedly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is no man shent,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5012" id="noteref-5012" epub:type="noteref">5012</a> to speak generally.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My son, thy tonguë shouldest thou restrain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At allë time, but<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5013" id="noteref-5013" epub:type="noteref">5013</a> when thou dost thy pain<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5014" id="noteref-5014" epub:type="noteref">5014</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To speak of God in honour and prayére.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The firstë virtue, son, if thou wilt lear,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5015" id="noteref-5015" epub:type="noteref">5015</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is to restrain and keepë well thy tongue;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5016" id="noteref-5016" epub:type="noteref">5016</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus learnë children, when that they be young.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My son, of muchë speaking evil advis’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where lessë speaking had enough suffic’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cometh much harm; thus was me told and taught;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In muchë speechë sinnë wanteth nót.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wost<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5017" id="noteref-5017" epub:type="noteref">5017</a> thou whereof a rakel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5018" id="noteref-5018" epub:type="noteref">5018</a> tonguë serveth?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right as a sword forcutteth and forcarveth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An arm in two, my dearë son, right so</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A tonguë cutteth friendship all in two.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A jangler<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5019" id="noteref-5019" epub:type="noteref">5019</a> is to God abomináble.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Read Solomon, so wise and honouráble;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Read David in his Psalms, and read Senec’.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My son, speak not, but with thine head thou beck,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5020" id="noteref-5020" epub:type="noteref">5020</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dissimule as thou wert<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5021" id="noteref-5021" epub:type="noteref">5021</a> deaf, if that thou hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A jangler speak of perilous mattére.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Fleming saith, and learn if that thee lest,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5022" id="noteref-5022" epub:type="noteref">5022</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That little jangling causeth muchë rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My son, if thou no wicked word hast said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee thar not dreadë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5023" id="noteref-5023" epub:type="noteref">5023</a> for to be bewray’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he that hath missaid, I dare well sayn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He may by no way call his word again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thing that is said is said, and forth it go’th,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5024" id="noteref-5024" epub:type="noteref">5024</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though him repent, or be he ne’er so loth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is his thrall,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5025" id="noteref-5025" epub:type="noteref">5025</a> to whom that he hath said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A tale, of which he is now evil apaid.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5026" id="noteref-5026" epub:type="noteref">5026</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>My son, beware, and be no author new</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of tidings, whether they be false or true;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5027" id="noteref-5027" epub:type="noteref">5027</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereso thou come, amongës high or low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keep well thy tongue, and think upon the crow.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
