<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Wife of Bath’s Tale</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-wife-of-baths-tale" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Wife of Bath’s Tale</h2>
			<section id="the-wife-of-baths-tale-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Prologue<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1741" id="noteref-1741" epub:type="noteref">1741</a></h3>
				<p>
					<span>Experience, though none authority<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1742" id="noteref-1742" epub:type="noteref">1742</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were in this world, is right enough for me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To speak of woe that is in marriáge:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, lordings, since I twelve year was of age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Thanked be God that is etern on live),<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1743" id="noteref-1743" epub:type="noteref">1743</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Husbands at the church door have I had five⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1744" id="noteref-1744" epub:type="noteref">1744</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I so often have y-wedded be⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all were worthy men in their degree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But me was told, not longë timë gone is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That sithen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1745" id="noteref-1745" epub:type="noteref">1745</a> Christë went never but onës</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wedding, in the Cane<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1746" id="noteref-1746" epub:type="noteref">1746</a> of Galilee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That by that ilk<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1747" id="noteref-1747" epub:type="noteref">1747</a> example taught he me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I not wedded shouldë be but once.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, hearken eke a sharp word for the nonce,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1748" id="noteref-1748" epub:type="noteref">1748</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside a wellë Jesus, God and man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spake in reproof of the Samaritan:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thou hast y-had five husbandës,” said he;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“And thilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1749" id="noteref-1749" epub:type="noteref">1749</a> man, that now hath wedded thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is not thine husband:”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1750" id="noteref-1750" epub:type="noteref">1750</a> thus said he certáin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What that he meant thereby, I cannot sayn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that I askë, why the fifthë man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was not husband to the Samaritan?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How many might she have in marriáge?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet heard I never tellen in mine age<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1751" id="noteref-1751" epub:type="noteref">1751</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon this number definitioún.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men may divine, and glosen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1752" id="noteref-1752" epub:type="noteref">1752</a> up and down;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But well I wot, express without a lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God bade us for to wax and multiply;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That gentle text can I well understand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eke well I wot, he said, that mine husbánd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should leave father and mother, and take to me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But of no number mentión made he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of bigamy or of octogamy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why then should men speak of it villainy?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1753" id="noteref-1753" epub:type="noteref">1753</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lo here, the wisë king Dan<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1754" id="noteref-1754" epub:type="noteref">1754</a> Solomon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I trow that he had wivës more than one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As would to God it lawful were to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be refreshed half so oft as he!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What gift<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1755" id="noteref-1755" epub:type="noteref">1755</a> of God had he for all his wivës?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No man hath such, that in this world alive is.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God wot, this noble king, as to my wit,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1756" id="noteref-1756" epub:type="noteref">1756</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first night had many a merry fit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With each of them, so well was him on live.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1757" id="noteref-1757" epub:type="noteref">1757</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blessed be God that I have wedded five!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Welcome the sixth whenever that he shall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For since I will not keep me chaste in all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When mine husband is from the world y-gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some Christian man shall weddë me anon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For then th’ apostle saith that I am free</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wed, a’ God’s half,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1758" id="noteref-1758" epub:type="noteref">1758</a> where it liketh me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saith, that to be wedded is no sin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Better is to be wedded than to brin.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1759" id="noteref-1759" epub:type="noteref">1759</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>What recketh me<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1760" id="noteref-1760" epub:type="noteref">1760</a> though folk say villainy<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1761" id="noteref-1761" epub:type="noteref">1761</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of shrewed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1762" id="noteref-1762" epub:type="noteref">1762</a> Lamech, and his bigamy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wot well Abraham was a holy man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Jacob eke, as far as ev’r I can.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1763" id="noteref-1763" epub:type="noteref">1763</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And each of them had wivës more than two;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many another holy man also.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where can ye see, in any manner age,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1764" id="noteref-1764" epub:type="noteref">1764</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That highë God defended<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1765" id="noteref-1765" epub:type="noteref">1765</a> marriáge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By word express? I pray you tell it me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or where commanded he virginity?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wot as well as you, it is no dread,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1766" id="noteref-1766" epub:type="noteref">1766</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ apostle, when he spake of maidenhead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said, that precept thereof had he none:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men may counsél a woman to be one,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1767" id="noteref-1767" epub:type="noteref">1767</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But counseling is no commandëment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He put it in our owen judgëment.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, haddë God commanded maidenhead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then had he damned<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1768" id="noteref-1768" epub:type="noteref">1768</a> wedding out of dread;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1769" id="noteref-1769" epub:type="noteref">1769</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And certes, if there were no seed y-sow,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1770" id="noteref-1770" epub:type="noteref">1770</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Virginity then whereof should it grow?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Paul durstë not commanden, at the least,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thing of which his Master gave no hest.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1771" id="noteref-1771" epub:type="noteref">1771</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dart<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1772" id="noteref-1772" epub:type="noteref">1772</a> is set up for virginity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Catch whoso may, who runneth best let see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But this word is not ta’en of every wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there as<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1773" id="noteref-1773" epub:type="noteref">1773</a> God will give it of his might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wot well that th’ apostle was a maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But natheless, although he wrote and said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would that every wight were such as he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All is but counsel to virginitý.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, since to be a wife he gave me leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of indulgence, so is it no repreve<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1774" id="noteref-1774" epub:type="noteref">1774</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To weddë me, if that my make<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1775" id="noteref-1775" epub:type="noteref">1775</a> should die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without exceptión<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1776" id="noteref-1776" epub:type="noteref">1776</a> of bigamy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All were it<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1777" id="noteref-1777" epub:type="noteref">1777</a> good no woman for to touch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(He meant as in his bed or in his couch),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For peril is both fire and tow t’ assemble;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye know what this example may resemble.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is all and some, he held virginity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More profit than wedding in fraïlty:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1778" id="noteref-1778" epub:type="noteref">1778</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Frailty clepe I, but if<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1779" id="noteref-1779" epub:type="noteref">1779</a> that he and she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would lead their livës all in chastity),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I grant it well, I have of none envý</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who maidenhead prefer to bigamy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It liketh them t’ be clean in body and ghost;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1780" id="noteref-1780" epub:type="noteref">1780</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of mine estate<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1781" id="noteref-1781" epub:type="noteref">1781</a> I will not make a boast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For, well ye know, a lord in his household</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath not every vessel all of gold;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1782" id="noteref-1782" epub:type="noteref">1782</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some are of tree, and do their lord servíce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God calleth folk to him in sundry wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And each one hath of God a proper gift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some this, some that, as liketh him to shift.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1783" id="noteref-1783" epub:type="noteref">1783</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Virginity is great perfectión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And continence eke with devotión:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Christ, that of perfection is the well,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1784" id="noteref-1784" epub:type="noteref">1784</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bade not every wight he should go sell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All that he had, and give it to the poor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in such wise follow him and his lore:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1785" id="noteref-1785" epub:type="noteref">1785</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He spake to them that would live perfectly⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, lordings, by your leave, that am not I;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will bestow the flower of mine age</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In th’ acts and in the fruits of marriáge.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Tell me also, to what conclusión<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1786" id="noteref-1786" epub:type="noteref">1786</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were members made of generatión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of so perfect wise a wight<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1787" id="noteref-1787" epub:type="noteref">1787</a> y-wrought?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trust me right well, they were not made for nought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glose whoso will, and say both up and down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they were made for the purgatioún</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of urine, and of other thingës smale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke to know a female from a male:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for none other causë? say ye no?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Experience wot well it is not so.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that the clerkës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1788" id="noteref-1788" epub:type="noteref">1788</a> be not with me wroth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say this, that they werë made for both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is to say, for office,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1789" id="noteref-1789" epub:type="noteref">1789</a> and for ease<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1790" id="noteref-1790" epub:type="noteref">1790</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of engendrure, there we God not displease.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should men ellës in their bookës set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That man shall yield unto his wife her debt?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now wherewith should he make his payëment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he us’d not his silly instrument?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then were they made upon a creature</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To purge urine, and eke for engendrure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I say not that every wight is hold,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1791" id="noteref-1791" epub:type="noteref">1791</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hath such harness<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1792" id="noteref-1792" epub:type="noteref">1792</a> as I to you told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To go and usë them in engendrure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then should men take of chastity no cure.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1793" id="noteref-1793" epub:type="noteref">1793</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Christ was a maid, and shapen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1794" id="noteref-1794" epub:type="noteref">1794</a> as a man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many a saint, since that this world began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet ever liv’d in perfect chastity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will not vie<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1795" id="noteref-1795" epub:type="noteref">1795</a> with no virginity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let them with bread of pured<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1796" id="noteref-1796" epub:type="noteref">1796</a> wheat be fed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let us wivës eat our barley bread.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet with barley bread, Mark tell us can,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1797" id="noteref-1797" epub:type="noteref">1797</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our Lord Jesus refreshed many a man.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In such estate as God hath cleped us,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1798" id="noteref-1798" epub:type="noteref">1798</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll persevere, I am not precious,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1799" id="noteref-1799" epub:type="noteref">1799</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>In wifehood I will use mine instrument</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As freely as my Maker hath it sent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I be dangerous<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1800" id="noteref-1800" epub:type="noteref">1800</a> God give me sorrow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine husband shall it have, both eve and morrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that him list come forth and pay his debt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A husband will I have, I will no let,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1801" id="noteref-1801" epub:type="noteref">1801</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which shall be both my debtor and my thrall,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1802" id="noteref-1802" epub:type="noteref">1802</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And have his tribulatión withal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his flesh, while that I am his wife.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have the power during all my life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his proper body, and not he;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right thus th’ apostle told it unto me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bade our husbands for to love us well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All this senténce me liketh every deal.⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1803" id="noteref-1803" epub:type="noteref">1803</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Up start the Pardoner, and that anon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now, Dame,” quoth he, “by God and by Saint John,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye are a noble preacher in this case.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was about to wed a wife, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What? should I bie<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1804" id="noteref-1804" epub:type="noteref">1804</a> it on my flesh so dear?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet had I lever<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1805" id="noteref-1805" epub:type="noteref">1805</a> wed no wife this year.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Abide,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1806" id="noteref-1806" epub:type="noteref">1806</a> quoth she; “my tale is not begun.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nay, thou shalt drinken of another tun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere that I go, shall savour worse than ale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when that I have told thee forth my tale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of tribulatión in marriáge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which I am expert in all mine age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(This is to say, myself hath been the whip),<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1807" id="noteref-1807" epub:type="noteref">1807</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then mayest thou choose whether thou wilt sip</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thilkë tunnë,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1808" id="noteref-1808" epub:type="noteref">1808</a> that I now shall broach.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beware of it, ere thou too nigh approach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I shall tell examples more than ten:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whoso will not beware by other men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By him shall other men corrected be:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These samë wordës writeth Ptolemý;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Read in his Almagest, and take it there.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Dame, I would pray you, if your will it were,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saidë this Pardoner, “as ye began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell forth your tale, and sparë for no man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And teach us youngë men of your practique.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Gladly,” quoth she, “since that it may you like.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that I pray to all this company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that I speak after my fantasy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To takë nought agrief<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1809" id="noteref-1809" epub:type="noteref">1809</a> what I may say;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For mine intent is only for to play.⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now, Sirs, then will I tell you forth my tale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ever may I drinkë wine or ale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall say sooth; the husbands that I had</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three of them werë good, and two were bad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The three were goodë men, and rich, and old.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unnethës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1810" id="noteref-1810" epub:type="noteref">1810</a> mightë they the statute hold<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1811" id="noteref-1811" epub:type="noteref">1811</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which that they were bounden unto me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet wot well what I mean of this, pardie.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1812" id="noteref-1812" epub:type="noteref">1812</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As God me help, I laugh when that I think</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How piteously at night I made them swink,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1813" id="noteref-1813" epub:type="noteref">1813</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, by my fay,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1814" id="noteref-1814" epub:type="noteref">1814</a> I told of it no store:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1815" id="noteref-1815" epub:type="noteref">1815</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>They had me giv’n their land and their treasór,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me needed not do longer diligence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To win their love, or do them reverence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They loved me so well, by God above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I toldë no dainty<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1816" id="noteref-1816" epub:type="noteref">1816</a> of their love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wise woman will busy her ever-in-one<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1817" id="noteref-1817" epub:type="noteref">1817</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To get their lovë, where that she hath none.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, since I had them wholly in my hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that they had me given all their land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should I takë keep<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1818" id="noteref-1818" epub:type="noteref">1818</a> them for to please,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1819" id="noteref-1819" epub:type="noteref">1819</a> it were for my profit, or mine ease?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I set them so a-workë, by my fay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That many a night they sangë, well-away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bacon was not fetched for them, I trow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That some men have in Essex at Dunmow.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1820" id="noteref-1820" epub:type="noteref">1820</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I govern’d them so well after my law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That each of them full blissful was and fawe<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1821" id="noteref-1821" epub:type="noteref">1821</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bringë me gay thingës from the fair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They were full glad when that I spake them fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, God it wot, I chid them spiteously.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1822" id="noteref-1822" epub:type="noteref">1822</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now hearken how I bare me properly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Ye wisë wivës, that can understand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus should ye speak, and bear them wrong on hand,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1823" id="noteref-1823" epub:type="noteref">1823</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For half so boldëly can there no man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swearen and lien as a woman can.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(I say not this by wivës that be wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if it be when they them misadvise.)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1824" id="noteref-1824" epub:type="noteref">1824</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wisë wife, if that she can<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1825" id="noteref-1825" epub:type="noteref">1825</a> her good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall bearë them on hand the cow is wood,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1826" id="noteref-1826" epub:type="noteref">1826</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And takë witness of her owen maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of their assent: but hearken how I said.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Sir oldë kaynard,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1827" id="noteref-1827" epub:type="noteref">1827</a> is this thine array?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why is my neighëbourë’s wife so gay?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She is honour’d over all where<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1828" id="noteref-1828" epub:type="noteref">1828</a> she go’th,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sit at home, I have no thrifty cloth.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1829" id="noteref-1829" epub:type="noteref">1829</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>What dost thou at my neighëbourë’s house?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is she so fair? art thou so amoroús?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What rown’st<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1830" id="noteref-1830" epub:type="noteref">1830</a> thou with our maid? <i xml:lang="la">ben’dicite</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sir oldë lechour, let thy japës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1831" id="noteref-1831" epub:type="noteref">1831</a> be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if I have a gossip, or a friend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Withoutë guilt), thou chidest as a fiend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that I walk or play unto his house.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou comest home as drunken as a mouse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And preachest on thy bench, with evil prefe:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1832" id="noteref-1832" epub:type="noteref">1832</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou say’st to me, it is a great mischief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wed a poorë woman, for costáge:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1833" id="noteref-1833" epub:type="noteref">1833</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if that she be rich, of high paráge,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1834" id="noteref-1834" epub:type="noteref">1834</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then say’st thou, that it is a tormentry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To suffer her pride and meláncholy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if that she be fair, thou very knave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou say’st that every holour<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1835" id="noteref-1835" epub:type="noteref">1835</a> will her have;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She may no while in chastity abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is assailed upon every side.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou say’st some folk desire us for richéss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some for our shape, and some for our fairness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And some, for she can either sing or dance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And some for gentiless and dalliance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some for her handës and her armës smale:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus goes all to the devil, by thy tale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou say’st, men may not keep a castle wall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That may be so assailed over all.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1836" id="noteref-1836" epub:type="noteref">1836</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if that she be foul, thou say’st that she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Coveteth every man that she may see;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as a spaniel she will on him leap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till she may findë some man her to cheap;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1837" id="noteref-1837" epub:type="noteref">1837</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And none so grey goose goes there in the lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(So say’st thou) that will be without a make.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1838" id="noteref-1838" epub:type="noteref">1838</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And say’st, it is a hard thing for to weld<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1839" id="noteref-1839" epub:type="noteref">1839</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thing that no man will, his thankës,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1840" id="noteref-1840" epub:type="noteref">1840</a> held.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1841" id="noteref-1841" epub:type="noteref">1841</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus say’st thou, lorel,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1842" id="noteref-1842" epub:type="noteref">1842</a> when thou go’st to bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that no wise man needeth for to wed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor no man that intendeth unto heaven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With wildë thunder dint<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1843" id="noteref-1843" epub:type="noteref">1843</a> and fiery leven<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1844" id="noteref-1844" epub:type="noteref">1844</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Motë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1845" id="noteref-1845" epub:type="noteref">1845</a> thy wicked neckë be to-broke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou say’st, that dropping houses, and eke smoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And chiding wivës, makë men to flee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of their owne house; ah! <i xml:lang="la">ben’dicite</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What aileth such an old man for to chide?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou say’st, we wivës will our vices hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till we be fast,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1846" id="noteref-1846" epub:type="noteref">1846</a> and then we will them shew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well may that be a proverb of a shrew.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1847" id="noteref-1847" epub:type="noteref">1847</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou say’st, that oxen, asses, horses, hounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They be assayed at diversë stounds,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1848" id="noteref-1848" epub:type="noteref">1848</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Basons and lavers, ere that men them buy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spoonës, stoolës, and all such husbandry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so be pots, and clothës, and array,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1849" id="noteref-1849" epub:type="noteref">1849</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But folk of wivës makë none assay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till they be wedded⁠—oldë dotard shrew!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then, say’st thou, we will our vices shew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou say’st also, that it displeaseth me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1850" id="noteref-1850" epub:type="noteref">1850</a> that thou wilt praisë my beauty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And but<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1851" id="noteref-1851" epub:type="noteref">1851</a> thou pore alway upon my face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And call me fairë dame in every place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And but<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1852" id="noteref-1852" epub:type="noteref">1852</a> thou make a feast on thilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1853" id="noteref-1853" epub:type="noteref">1853</a> day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I was born, and make me fresh and gay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And but thou do to my norice<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1854" id="noteref-1854" epub:type="noteref">1854</a> honoúr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to my chamberere<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1855" id="noteref-1855" epub:type="noteref">1855</a> within my bow’r,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to my father’s folk, and mine allies;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1856" id="noteref-1856" epub:type="noteref">1856</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus sayest thou, old barrel full of lies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet also of our prentice Jenkin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For his crisp hair, shining as gold so fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for he squireth me both up and down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet hast thou caught a false suspicioún:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will him not, though thou wert dead to-morrow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But tell me this, why hidest thou, with sorrow,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1857" id="noteref-1857" epub:type="noteref">1857</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The keyës of thy chest away from me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is my good<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1858" id="noteref-1858" epub:type="noteref">1858</a> as well as thine, pardie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What, think’st to make an idiot of our dame?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, by that lord that callëd is Saint Jame,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1859" id="noteref-1859" epub:type="noteref">1859</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt not both, although that thou wert wood,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1860" id="noteref-1860" epub:type="noteref">1860</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be master of my body, and my good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The one thou shalt forego, maugré<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1861" id="noteref-1861" epub:type="noteref">1861</a> thine eyen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What helpeth it of me t’ inquire and spyen?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I trow thou wouldest lock me in thy chest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shouldest say, ‘Fair wife, go where thee lest;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1862" id="noteref-1862" epub:type="noteref">1862</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take your disport; I will believe no tales;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know you for a true wife, Dame Ales.’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1863" id="noteref-1863" epub:type="noteref">1863</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“We love no man, that taketh keep<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1864" id="noteref-1864" epub:type="noteref">1864</a> or charge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where that we go; we will be at our large.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of allë men most blessed may he be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wise astrologer Dan<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1865" id="noteref-1865" epub:type="noteref">1865</a> Ptolemy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That saith this proverb in his Almagest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Of allë men his wisdom is highést,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That recketh not who hath the world in hand.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By this proverb thou shalt well understand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have thou enough, what thar<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1866" id="noteref-1866" epub:type="noteref">1866</a> thee reck or care</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How merrily that other folkës fare?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For certes, oldë dotard, by your leave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye shall have [pleasure] right enough at eve.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is too great a niggard that will werne<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1867" id="noteref-1867" epub:type="noteref">1867</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>A man to light a candle at his lantérn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shall have never the less light, pardie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have thou enough, thee thar<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1868" id="noteref-1868" epub:type="noteref">1868</a> not plainë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1869" id="noteref-1869" epub:type="noteref">1869</a> thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou say’st also, if that we make us gay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With clothing and with precious array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it is peril of our chastity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet⁠—with sorrow!⁠—thou enforcest thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And say’st these words in the apostle’s name:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘In habit made with chastity and shame<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1870" id="noteref-1870" epub:type="noteref">1870</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye women shall apparel you,’ quoth he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘And not in tressed hair and gay perrie,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1871" id="noteref-1871" epub:type="noteref">1871</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As pearlës, nor with gold, nor clothës rich.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After thy text nor after thy rubrich</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will not work as muchel as a gnat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou say’st also, I walk out like a cat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For whoso wouldë singe the cattë’s skin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then will the cattë well dwell in her inn;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1872" id="noteref-1872" epub:type="noteref">1872</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if the cattë’s skin be sleek and gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She will not dwell in housë half a day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But forth she will, ere any day be daw’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shew her skin, and go a caterwaw’d.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1873" id="noteref-1873" epub:type="noteref">1873</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is to say, if I be gay, sir shrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will run out, my borel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1874" id="noteref-1874" epub:type="noteref">1874</a> for to shew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sir oldë fool, what helpeth thee to spyen?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though thou pray Argus with his hundred eyen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be my wardécorps,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1875" id="noteref-1875" epub:type="noteref">1875</a> as he can best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In faith he shall not keep me, but me lest:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1876" id="noteref-1876" epub:type="noteref">1876</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet could I make his beard,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1877" id="noteref-1877" epub:type="noteref">1877</a> so may I thé.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1878" id="noteref-1878" epub:type="noteref">1878</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Thou sayest eke, that there be thingës three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which thingës greatly trouble all this earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that no wightë may endure the ferth:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1879" id="noteref-1879" epub:type="noteref">1879</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>O lefe<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1880" id="noteref-1880" epub:type="noteref">1880</a> sir shrew, may Jesus short<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1881" id="noteref-1881" epub:type="noteref">1881</a> thy life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet preachest thou, and say’st, a hateful wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Y-reckon’d is for one of these mischances.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be there none other manner resemblánces<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1882" id="noteref-1882" epub:type="noteref">1882</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ye may liken your parables unto,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if a silly wife be one of tho?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1883" id="noteref-1883" epub:type="noteref">1883</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou likenest a woman’s love to hell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To barren land where water may not dwell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou likenest it also to wild fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The more it burns, the more it hath desire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To cónsume every thing that burnt will be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou sayest, right as wormës shend<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1884" id="noteref-1884" epub:type="noteref">1884</a> a tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right so a wife destroyeth her husbond;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This know they well that be to wivës bond.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lordings, right thus, as ye have understand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bare I stiffly mine old husbands on hand,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1885" id="noteref-1885" epub:type="noteref">1885</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thus they saiden in their drunkenness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all was false, but that I took witness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Jenkin, and upon my niece also.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Lord! the pain I did them, and the woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full guiltëless, by Goddë’s sweetë pine;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1886" id="noteref-1886" epub:type="noteref">1886</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as a horse I couldë bite and whine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I couldë plain,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1887" id="noteref-1887" epub:type="noteref">1887</a> an’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1888" id="noteref-1888" epub:type="noteref">1888</a> I was in the guilt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ellës oftentime I had been spilt.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1889" id="noteref-1889" epub:type="noteref">1889</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whoso first cometh to the nilll, first grint;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1890" id="noteref-1890" epub:type="noteref">1890</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I plained first, so was our war y-stint.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1891" id="noteref-1891" epub:type="noteref">1891</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>They were full glad to excuse them full blive<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1892" id="noteref-1892" epub:type="noteref">1892</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of things that they never aguilt their live.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1893" id="noteref-1893" epub:type="noteref">1893</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of wenches would I bearë them on hand,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1894" id="noteref-1894" epub:type="noteref">1894</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that for sickness scarcely might they stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet tickled I his heartë for that he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ween’d<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1895" id="noteref-1895" epub:type="noteref">1895</a> that I had of him so great cherté:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1896" id="noteref-1896" epub:type="noteref">1896</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I swore that all my walking out by night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was for to éspy wenches that he dight:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1897" id="noteref-1897" epub:type="noteref">1897</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under that colour had I many a mirth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all such wit is given us at birth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deceit, weeping, and spinning, God doth give</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To women kindly,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1898" id="noteref-1898" epub:type="noteref">1898</a> while that they may live.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus of one thing I may vauntë me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At th’ end I had the better in each degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By sleight, or force, or by some manner thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As by continual murmur or grudging,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1899" id="noteref-1899" epub:type="noteref">1899</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Namely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1900" id="noteref-1900" epub:type="noteref">1900</a> a-bed, there haddë they mischance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There would I chide, and do them no pleasance:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would no longer in the bed abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that I felt his arm over my side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till he had made his ransom unto me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then would I suffer him do his nicetý.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1901" id="noteref-1901" epub:type="noteref">1901</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore every man this tale I tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Win whoso may, for all is for to sell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With empty hand men may no hawkës lure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For winning would I all his will endure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And makë me a feigned appetite⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet in bacon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1902" id="noteref-1902" epub:type="noteref">1902</a> had I never delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That made me that I ever would them chide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, though the Pope had sitten them beside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would not spare them at their owen board,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, by my troth, I quit<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1903" id="noteref-1903" epub:type="noteref">1903</a> them word for word.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As help me very God omnipotent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though I right now should make my testament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I owe them not a word, that is not quit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I brought it so aboutë by my wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they must give it up, as for the best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ellës had we never been in rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, though he looked as a wood<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1904" id="noteref-1904" epub:type="noteref">1904</a> lión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet should he fail of his conclusión.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then would I say, “Now, goodë lefe,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1905" id="noteref-1905" epub:type="noteref">1905</a> take keep<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1906" id="noteref-1906" epub:type="noteref">1906</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>How meekly looketh Wilken ourë sheep!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come near, my spouse, and let me ba<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1907" id="noteref-1907" epub:type="noteref">1907</a> thy cheek.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye shouldë be all patient and meek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And have a sweet y-spiced<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1908" id="noteref-1908" epub:type="noteref">1908</a> conscience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since ye so preach of Jobë’s patience.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suffer alway, since ye so well can preach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And but<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1909" id="noteref-1909" epub:type="noteref">1909</a> ye do, certáin we shall you teach</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it is fair to have a wife in peace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One of us two must bowë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1910" id="noteref-1910" epub:type="noteref">1910</a> doubtëless:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And since a man is more reasónable</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than woman is, ye must be suff’rable.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What aileth you to grudgë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1911" id="noteref-1911" epub:type="noteref">1911</a> thus and groan?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is it for ye would have my [love] alone?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why, take it all: lo, have it every deal,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1912" id="noteref-1912" epub:type="noteref">1912</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peter!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1913" id="noteref-1913" epub:type="noteref">1913</a> shrew<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1914" id="noteref-1914" epub:type="noteref">1914</a> you but ye love it well.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For if I wouldë sell my <i xml:lang="fr">bellë chose</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I couldë walk as fresh as is a rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I will keep it for your owen tooth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye be to blame, by God, I say you sooth.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such manner wordës haddë we on hand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now will I speaken of my fourth husbánd.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>My fourthë husband was a revellour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is to say, he had a paramour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I was young and full of ragerie,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1915" id="noteref-1915" epub:type="noteref">1915</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stubborn and strong, and jolly as a pie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then could I dancë to a harpë smale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sing, y-wis,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1916" id="noteref-1916" epub:type="noteref">1916</a> as any nightingale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I had drunk a draught of sweetë wine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Metellius, the foulë churl, the swine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That with a staff bereft his wife of life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1917" id="noteref-1917" epub:type="noteref">1917</a> she drank wine, though I had been his wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Never should he have daunted me from drink:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, after wine, of Venus most I think.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all so sure as cold engenders hail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A liquorish mouth must have a liquorish tail.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In woman vinolent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1918" id="noteref-1918" epub:type="noteref">1918</a> is no defence,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1919" id="noteref-1919" epub:type="noteref">1919</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>This knowë lechours by experience.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, lord Christ, when that it rememb’reth me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon my youth, and on my jollity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It tickleth me about mine heartë-root;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto this day it doth mine heartë boot,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1920" id="noteref-1920" epub:type="noteref">1920</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I have had my world as in my time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But age, alas! that all will envenime,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1921" id="noteref-1921" epub:type="noteref">1921</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath me bereft my beauty and my pith:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1922" id="noteref-1922" epub:type="noteref">1922</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let go; farewell; the devil go therewith.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flour is gon, there is no more to tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bran, as I best may, now must I sell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But yet to be right merry will I fand.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1923" id="noteref-1923" epub:type="noteref">1923</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now forth to tell you of my fourth husband,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say, I in my heart had great despite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he of any other had delight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he was quit,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1924" id="noteref-1924" epub:type="noteref">1924</a> by God and by Saint Joce:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1925" id="noteref-1925" epub:type="noteref">1925</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I made for him of the same wood a cross;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not of my body in no foul mannére,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But certainly I madë folk such cheer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in his owen grease I made him fry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For anger, and for very jealousý.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By God, in earth I was his purgatory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which I hope his soul may be in glory.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, God it wot, he sat full oft and sung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that his shoe full bitterly him wrung.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1926" id="noteref-1926" epub:type="noteref">1926</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was no wight, save God and he, that wist</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In many wise how sore I did him twist.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He died when I came from Jerusalem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lies in grave under the roodë beam:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1927" id="noteref-1927" epub:type="noteref">1927</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although his tomb is not so curious</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As was the sepulchre of Darius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which that Apelles wrought so subtlely.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is but waste to bury them preciously.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let him fare well, God give his soulë rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is now in his grave and in his chest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now of my fifthë husband will I tell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God let his soul never come into hell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet was he to me the mostë shrew;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1928" id="noteref-1928" epub:type="noteref">1928</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That feel I on my ribbës all by rew,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1929" id="noteref-1929" epub:type="noteref">1929</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever shall, until mine ending day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in our bed he was so fresh and gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therewithal so well he could me glose,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1930" id="noteref-1930" epub:type="noteref">1930</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that he wouldë have my <i xml:lang="fr">bellë chose</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though he had beaten me on every bone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet could he win again my love anon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I trow, I lov’d him better, for that he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was of his love so dangerous<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1931" id="noteref-1931" epub:type="noteref">1931</a> to me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We women have, if that I shall not lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this mattér a quaintë fantasy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whatever thing we may not lightly have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereafter will we cry all day and crave.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forbid us thing, and that desirë we;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Press on us fast, and thennë will we flee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With danger<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1932" id="noteref-1932" epub:type="noteref">1932</a> utter we all our chaffare;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1933" id="noteref-1933" epub:type="noteref">1933</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great press at market maketh dearë ware,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And too great cheap is held at little price;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This knoweth every woman that is wise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My fifthë husband, God his soulë bless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which that I took for love and no richéss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He some time was a clerk of Oxenford,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1934" id="noteref-1934" epub:type="noteref">1934</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And had left school, and went at home to board</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With my gossip, dwelling in ourë town:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God have her soul, her name was Alisoun.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She knew my heart, and all my privity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bet than our parish priest, so may I thé.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1935" id="noteref-1935" epub:type="noteref">1935</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To her betrayed I my counsel all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For had my husband pissed on a wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or done a thing that should have cost his life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To her, and to another worthy wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to my niece, which that I loved well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would have told his counsel every deal.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1936" id="noteref-1936" epub:type="noteref">1936</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so I did full often, God it wot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That made his face full often red and hot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For very shame, and blam’d himself, for he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had told to me so great a privity.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1937" id="noteref-1937" epub:type="noteref">1937</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so befell that onës in a Lent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(So oftentimes I to my gossip went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ever yet I loved to be gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for to walk in March, April, and May</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From house to house, to hearë sundry tales),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Jenkin clerk, and my gossíp, Dame Ales,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I myself, into the fieldës went.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine husband was at London all that Lent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I had the better leisure for to play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for to see, and eke for to be sey<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1938" id="noteref-1938" epub:type="noteref">1938</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of lusty folk; what wist I where my grace<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1939" id="noteref-1939" epub:type="noteref">1939</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was shapen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1940" id="noteref-1940" epub:type="noteref">1940</a> for to be, or in what place?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore made I my visitatións</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To vigilies,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1941" id="noteref-1941" epub:type="noteref">1941</a> and to processións,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To preachings eke, and to these pilgrimáges,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To plays of miracles, and marriáges,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And weared upon me gay scarlet gites.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1942" id="noteref-1942" epub:type="noteref">1942</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>These wormës, nor these mothës, nor these mites</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On my apparel frett<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1943" id="noteref-1943" epub:type="noteref">1943</a> them never a deal<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1944" id="noteref-1944" epub:type="noteref">1944</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And know’st thou why? for they were used<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1945" id="noteref-1945" epub:type="noteref">1945</a> well.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now will I tellë forth what happen’d me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say, that in the fieldës walked we,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till truëly we had such dalliance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This clerk and I, that of my purveyance<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1946" id="noteref-1946" epub:type="noteref">1946</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I spake to him, and told him how that he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I were widow, shouldë weddë me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For certainly, I say for no bobance,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1947" id="noteref-1947" epub:type="noteref">1947</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet was I never without purveyance<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1948" id="noteref-1948" epub:type="noteref">1948</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of marriage, nor of other thingës eke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hold a mouse’s wit not worth a leek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hath but one hole for to startë to,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1949" id="noteref-1949" epub:type="noteref">1949</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if that failë, then is all y-do.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1950" id="noteref-1950" epub:type="noteref">1950</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>[I bare him on hand<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1951" id="noteref-1951" epub:type="noteref">1951</a> he had enchanted me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(My damë taughtë me that subtilty);</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke I said, I mette<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1952" id="noteref-1952" epub:type="noteref">1952</a> of him all night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would have slain me, as I lay upright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all my bed was full of very blood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But yet I hop’d that he should do me good;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For blood betoken’d gold, as me was taught.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all was false, I dream’d of him right naught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as I follow’d aye my damë’s lore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As well of that as of other things more.]</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now, sir, let me see, what shall I sayn?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aha! by God, I have my tale again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that my fourthë husband was on bier,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wept algate<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1953" id="noteref-1953" epub:type="noteref">1953</a> and made a sorry cheer,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1954" id="noteref-1954" epub:type="noteref">1954</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As wivës must, for it is the uságe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with my kerchief covered my viságe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, for I was provided with a make,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1955" id="noteref-1955" epub:type="noteref">1955</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wept but little, that I undertake.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1956" id="noteref-1956" epub:type="noteref">1956</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To churchë was mine husband borne a-morrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With neighëbours that for him madë sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Jenkin, ourë clerk, was one of tho:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1957" id="noteref-1957" epub:type="noteref">1957</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As help me God, when that I saw him go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the bier, methought he had a pair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of leggës and of feet so clean and fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all my heart I gave unto his hold.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1958" id="noteref-1958" epub:type="noteref">1958</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was, I trow, a twenty winter old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I was forty, if I shall say sooth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But yet I had always a coltë’s tooth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gat-toothed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1959" id="noteref-1959" epub:type="noteref">1959</a> I was, and that became me well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I had the print of Saintë Venus’ seal.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>[As help me God, I was a lusty one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fair, and rich, and young, and well begone:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1960" id="noteref-1960" epub:type="noteref">1960</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For certes I am all venerian</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In feeling, and my heart is martian;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1961" id="noteref-1961" epub:type="noteref">1961</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Venus me gave my lust and liquorishness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Mars gave me my sturdy hardiness.]</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine ascendant was Taure,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1962" id="noteref-1962" epub:type="noteref">1962</a> and Mars therein:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas, alas, that ever love was sin!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I follow’d aye mine inclinatión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By virtue of my constellatión:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That made me that I couldë not withdraw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My chamber of Venus from a good felláw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>[Yet have I Martë’s mark upon my face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And also in another privy place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For God so wisly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1963" id="noteref-1963" epub:type="noteref">1963</a> be my salvatión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I loved never by discretión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ever follow’d mine own appetite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1964" id="noteref-1964" epub:type="noteref">1964</a> were he short, or long, or black, or white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I took no keep,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1965" id="noteref-1965" epub:type="noteref">1965</a> so that he liked me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How poor he was, neither of what degree.]</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What should I say? but that at the month’s end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This jolly clerk Jenkin, that was so hend,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1966" id="noteref-1966" epub:type="noteref">1966</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had wedded me with great solemnity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to him gave I all the land and fee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ever was me given therebefore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But afterward repented me full sore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wouldë suffer nothing of my list.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1967" id="noteref-1967" epub:type="noteref">1967</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>By God, he smote me onës with his fist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that I rent out of his book a leaf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of the stroke mine earë wax’d all deaf.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stubborn I was, as is a lioness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of my tongue a very jangleress,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1968" id="noteref-1968" epub:type="noteref">1968</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And walk I would, as I had done beforn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From house to house, although he had it sworn:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1969" id="noteref-1969" epub:type="noteref">1969</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which he oftentimes wouldë preach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And me of oldë Roman gestës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1970" id="noteref-1970" epub:type="noteref">1970</a> teach.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How that Sulpitius Gallus left his wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her forsook for term of all his,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For nought but open-headed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1971" id="noteref-1971" epub:type="noteref">1971</a> he her say<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1972" id="noteref-1972" epub:type="noteref">1972</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Looking out at his door upon a day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another Roman<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1973" id="noteref-1973" epub:type="noteref">1973</a> told he me by name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, for his wife was at a summer game</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without his knowing, he forsook her eke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then would he upon his Bible seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1974" id="noteref-1974" epub:type="noteref">1974</a> proverb of Ecclesiast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where he commandeth, and forbiddeth fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Man shall not suffer his wife go roll about.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then would he say right thus withoutë doubt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“<em>Whoso that buildeth his house all of sallows,</em><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1975" id="noteref-1975" epub:type="noteref">1975</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>And pricketh his blind horse over the fallows,</em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<em>And suff’reth his wife to go seekë hallows,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1976" id="noteref-1976" epub:type="noteref">1976</a></em>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>Is worthy to be hanged on the gallows.</em>”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all for nought; I settë not a haw<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1977" id="noteref-1977" epub:type="noteref">1977</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his provérbs, nor of his oldë saw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor would I not of him corrected be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hate them that my vices tellë me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so do more of us (God wot) than I.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This made him wood<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1978" id="noteref-1978" epub:type="noteref">1978</a> with me all utterly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wouldë not forbear<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1979" id="noteref-1979" epub:type="noteref">1979</a> him in no case.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now will I say you sooth, by Saint Thomas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why that I rent out of his book a leaf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which he smote me, so that I was deaf.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He had a book, that gladly night and day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For his disport he would it read alway;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He call’d it Valerie,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1980" id="noteref-1980" epub:type="noteref">1980</a> and Theophrast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with that book he laugh’d alway full fast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke there was a clerk sometime at Rome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A cardinal, that hightë Saint Jerome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That made a book against Jovinian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which book was there; and eke Tertullian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chrysippus, Trotula, and Heloïse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was an abbess not far from Paris;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke the Parables<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1981" id="noteref-1981" epub:type="noteref">1981</a> of Solomon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ovidë’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Art</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1982" id="noteref-1982" epub:type="noteref">1982</a> and bourdës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1983" id="noteref-1983" epub:type="noteref">1983</a> many one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And allë these were bound in one volume.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every night and day was his custume</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(When he had leisure and vacatión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From other worldly occupatión)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To readen in this book of wicked wives.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He knew of them more legends and more lives</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than be of goodë wivës in the Bible.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, trust me well, it is an impossíble</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That any clerk will speakë good of wives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(But if<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1984" id="noteref-1984" epub:type="noteref">1984</a> it be of holy saintës’ lives)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor of none other woman never the mo’.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who painted the lión, tell it me, who?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By God, if women haddë written stories,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As clerkës have within their oratóries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They would have writ of men more wickedness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than all the mark of Adam<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1985" id="noteref-1985" epub:type="noteref">1985</a> may redress.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The children of Mercury and of Venus,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1986" id="noteref-1986" epub:type="noteref">1986</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be in their working full contrarious.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mercury loveth wisdom and sciénce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Venus loveth riot and dispence.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1987" id="noteref-1987" epub:type="noteref">1987</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for their diverse dispositión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each falls in other’s exaltatión.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1988" id="noteref-1988" epub:type="noteref">1988</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thus, God wot, Mercúry is desolate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Pisces, where Venus is exaltáte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Venus falls where Mercury is raised.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore no woman by no clerk is praised.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The clerk, when he is old, and may not do</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Venus’ works not worth his oldë shoe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then sits he down, and writes in his dotage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That women cannot keep their marriáge.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now to purpose, why I toldë thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I was beaten for a book, pardie.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Upon a night Jenkin, that was our sire,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1989" id="noteref-1989" epub:type="noteref">1989</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Read on his book, as he sat by the fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Eva first, that for her wickedness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was all mankind brought into wretchedness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which that Jesus Christ himself was slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That bought us with his heartë-blood again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo here express of women may ye find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That woman was the loss of all mankind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then read he me how Samson lost his hairs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sleeping, his leman cut them with her shears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through whichë treason lost he both his eyen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then read he me, if that I shall not lien,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Hercules, and of his Dejanire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That caused him to set himself on fire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing forgot he of the care and woe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Socrates had with his wivës two;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How Xantippe cast piss upon his head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This silly man sat still, as he were dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wip’d his head, and no more durst he sayn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, “Ere the thunder stint<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1990" id="noteref-1990" epub:type="noteref">1990</a> there cometh rain.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Phasiphaë, that was queen of Crete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For shrewedness<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1991" id="noteref-1991" epub:type="noteref">1991</a> he thought the talë sweet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fy, speak no more, it is a grisly thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of her horrible lust and her likíng.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Clytemnestra, for her lechery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That falsely made her husband for to die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He read it with full good devotión.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He told me eke, for what occasión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amphiorax at Thebes lost his life:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My husband had a legend of his wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eryphilé, that for an ouche<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1992" id="noteref-1992" epub:type="noteref">1992</a> of gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had privily unto the Greekës told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where that her husband hid him in a place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which he had at Thebes sorry grace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Luna told he me, and of Lucie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They bothë made their husbands for to die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That one for love, that other was for hate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Luna her husband on an ev’ning late</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Empoison’d had, for that she was his foe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lucia liquorish lov’d her husband so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, for he should always upon her think,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She gave him such a manner<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1993" id="noteref-1993" epub:type="noteref">1993</a> lovë-drink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he was dead before it were the morrow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus algatës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1994" id="noteref-1994" epub:type="noteref">1994</a> husbands haddë sorrow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then told he me how one Latumeus</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Complained to his fellow Arius</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in his garden growed such a tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On which he said how that his wivës three</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hanged themselves for heart dispiteous.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O leve<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1995" id="noteref-1995" epub:type="noteref">1995</a> brother,” quoth this Arius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Give me a plant of thilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1996" id="noteref-1996" epub:type="noteref">1996</a> blessed tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in my garden planted shall it be.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of later date of wivës hath he read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That some have slain their husbands in their bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let their lechour dight them all the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While that the corpse lay on the floor upright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And some have driven nails into their brain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While that they slept, and thus they have them slain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some have them given poison in their drink:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He spake more harm than heartë may bethink.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And therewithal he knew of more provérbs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than in this world there groweth grass or herbs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Better (quoth he) thine habitatión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be with a lion, or a foul dragón,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than with a woman using for to chide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Better (quoth he) high in the roof abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than with an angry woman in the house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They be so wicked and contrarioús:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They hatë that their husbands loven aye.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said, “A woman cast her shame away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When she cast off her smock;” and farthermo’,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“A fair woman, but<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1997" id="noteref-1997" epub:type="noteref">1997</a> she be chaste also,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is like a gold ring in a sowë’s nose.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who couldë ween,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1998" id="noteref-1998" epub:type="noteref">1998</a> or who couldë suppose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The woe that in mine heart was, and the pine?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1999" id="noteref-1999" epub:type="noteref">1999</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when I saw that he would never fine<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2000" id="noteref-2000" epub:type="noteref">2000</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To readen on this cursed book all night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All suddenly three leavës have I plight<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2001" id="noteref-2001" epub:type="noteref">2001</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of his book, right as he read, and eke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I with my fist so took him on the cheek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in our fire he backward fell adown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he up start, as doth a wood lión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with his fist he smote me on the head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That on the floor I lay as I were dead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when he saw how still that there I lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was aghast, and would have fled away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till at the last out of my swoon I braid,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2002" id="noteref-2002" epub:type="noteref">2002</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Oh, hast thou slain me, thou false thief?” I said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“And for my land thus hast thou murder’d me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere I be dead, yet will I kissë thee.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And near he came, and kneeled fair adown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saidë, “Dearë sister Alisoun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As help me God, I shall thee never smite:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I have done it is thyself to wite,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2003" id="noteref-2003" epub:type="noteref">2003</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgive it me, and that I thee beseek.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2004" id="noteref-2004" epub:type="noteref">2004</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet eftsoons<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2005" id="noteref-2005" epub:type="noteref">2005</a> I hit him on the cheek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saidë, “Thief, thus much am I awreak.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2006" id="noteref-2006" epub:type="noteref">2006</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now will I die, I may no longer speak.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But at the last, with muchë care and woe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We fell accorded<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2007" id="noteref-2007" epub:type="noteref">2007</a> by ourselvës two:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He gave me all the bridle in mine hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To have the governance of house and land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of his tongue, and of his hand also.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I made him burn his book anon right tho.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2008" id="noteref-2008" epub:type="noteref">2008</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when that I had gotten unto me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By mast’ry all the sovereignëty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that he said, “Mine owen truë wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do as thee list,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2009" id="noteref-2009" epub:type="noteref">2009</a> the term of all thy life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keep thine honoúr, and eke keep mine estate;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After that day we never had debate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God help me so, I was to him as kind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As any wife from Denmark unto Ind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And also true, and so was he to me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray to God that sits in majesty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So bless his soulë, for his mercy dear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now will I say my tale, if ye will hear.⁠—</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Friar laugh’d when he had heard all this:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now, Dame,” quoth he, “so have I joy and bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is a long preamble of a tale.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when the Sompnour heard the Friar gale,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2010" id="noteref-2010" epub:type="noteref">2010</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Lo,” quoth this Sompnour, “Goddë’s armës two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A friar will intermete<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2011" id="noteref-2011" epub:type="noteref">2011</a> him evermo’:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, goodë men, a fly and eke a frere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will fall in ev’ry dish and eke mattére.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What speak’st thou of perambulatioún?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2012" id="noteref-2012" epub:type="noteref">2012</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>What? amble or trot; or peace, or go sit down:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou lettest<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2013" id="noteref-2013" epub:type="noteref">2013</a> our disport in this mattére.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Yea, wilt thou so, Sir Sompnour?” quoth the Frere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now by my faith I shall, ere that I go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell of a Sompnour such a tale or two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all the folk shall laughen in this place.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now do, else, Friar, I beshrew<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2014" id="noteref-2014" epub:type="noteref">2014</a> thy face,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quoth this Sompnour; “and I beshrewë me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2015" id="noteref-2015" epub:type="noteref">2015</a> I tellë talës two or three</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of friars, ere I come to Sittingbourne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I shall make thine heartë for to mourn:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For well I wot thy patience is gone.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our Hostë criëd, “Peace, and that anon;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saidë, “Let the woman tell her tale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye fare<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2016" id="noteref-2016" epub:type="noteref">2016</a> as folk that drunken be of ale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do, Dame, tell forth your tale, and that is best.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“All ready, sir,” quoth she, “right as you lest,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2017" id="noteref-2017" epub:type="noteref">2017</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I have licence of this worthy Frere.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Yes, Dame,” quoth he, “tell forth, and I will hear.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-wife-of-baths-tale-body" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Tale<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2018" id="noteref-2018" epub:type="noteref">2018</a></h3>
				<p>
					<span>In oldë dayës of the king Arthoúr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which that Britons speakë great honoúr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All was this land full fill’d of faërie;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2019" id="noteref-2019" epub:type="noteref">2019</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Elf-queen, with her jolly company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Danced full oft in many a green mead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This was the old opinion, as I read;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I speak of many hundred years ago;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now can no man see none elvës mo’,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For now the great charitý and prayéres</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of limitours,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2020" id="noteref-2020" epub:type="noteref">2020</a> and other holy freres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That search every land and ev’ry stream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thick as motës in the sunnë-beam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blessing halls, chambers, kitchenës, and bowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cities and burghës, castles high and towers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thorpës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2021" id="noteref-2021" epub:type="noteref">2021</a> and barnës, shepens<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2022" id="noteref-2022" epub:type="noteref">2022</a> and dairies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This makes that there be now no faëries:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For there as<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2023" id="noteref-2023" epub:type="noteref">2023</a> wont to walkë was an elf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There walketh now the limitour himself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In undermelës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2024" id="noteref-2024" epub:type="noteref">2024</a> and in morrownings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saith his matins and his holy things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he goes in his limitatioún.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2025" id="noteref-2025" epub:type="noteref">2025</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Women may now go safely up and down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In every bush, and under every tree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is none other incubus<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2026" id="noteref-2026" epub:type="noteref">2026</a> but he;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he will do to them no dishonoúr.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And so befell it, that this king Arthoúr</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had in his house a lusty bachelér,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That on a day came riding from rivér:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2027" id="noteref-2027" epub:type="noteref">2027</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And happen’d, that, alone as she was born,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw a maiden walking him beforn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which maiden anon, maugré<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2028" id="noteref-2028" epub:type="noteref">2028</a> her head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By very force he reft her maidenhead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which oppressión was such clamoúr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And such pursuit unto the king Arthoúr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That damned<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2029" id="noteref-2029" epub:type="noteref">2029</a> was this knight for to be dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By course of law, and should have lost his head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Paráventure such<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2030" id="noteref-2030" epub:type="noteref">2030</a> was the statute tho),<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2031" id="noteref-2031" epub:type="noteref">2031</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that the queen and other ladies mo’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So long they prayed the king of his grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till he his life him granted in the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gave him to the queen, all at her will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To choose whether she would him save or spill.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2032" id="noteref-2032" epub:type="noteref">2032</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The queen thanked the king with all her might;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, after this, thus spake she to the knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that she saw her time upon a day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thou standest yet,” quoth she, “in such array,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2033" id="noteref-2033" epub:type="noteref">2033</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of thy life yet hast thou no suretý;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I grant thee life, if thou canst tell to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What thing is it that women most desiren:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beware, and keep thy neck-bone from the iron.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2034" id="noteref-2034" epub:type="noteref">2034</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if thou canst not tell it me anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet will I give thee leavë for to gon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A twelvemonth and a day, to seek and lear<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2035" id="noteref-2035" epub:type="noteref">2035</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>An answer suffisant<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2036" id="noteref-2036" epub:type="noteref">2036</a> in this mattére.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And surety will I have, ere that thou pace,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2037" id="noteref-2037" epub:type="noteref">2037</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy body for to yielden in this place.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Woe was the knight, and sorrowfully siked;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2038" id="noteref-2038" epub:type="noteref">2038</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what? he might not do all as him liked.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the last he chose him for to wend,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2039" id="noteref-2039" epub:type="noteref">2039</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And come again, right at the yearë’s end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With such answér as God would him purvey:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2040" id="noteref-2040" epub:type="noteref">2040</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And took his leave, and wended forth his way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He sought in ev’ry house and ev’ry place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where as he hoped for to findë grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To learnë what thing women love the most:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he could not arrive in any coast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where as he mightë find in this mattére</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two creatures accordíng in fere.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2041" id="noteref-2041" epub:type="noteref">2041</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some said that women loved best richéss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some said honoúr, and some said jolliness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some rich array, and some said lust<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2042" id="noteref-2042" epub:type="noteref">2042</a> a-bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And oft time to be widow and be wed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some said, that we are in our heart most eased</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that we are y-flatter’d and y-praised.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He went full nigh the sooth,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2043" id="noteref-2043" epub:type="noteref">2043</a> I will not lie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A man shall win us best with flattery;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with attendance, and with business</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be we y-liméd,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2044" id="noteref-2044" epub:type="noteref">2044</a> bothë more and less.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And some men said that we do love the best</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For to be free, and do right as us lest,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2045" id="noteref-2045" epub:type="noteref">2045</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that no man reprove us of our vice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But say that we are wise, and nothing nice,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2046" id="noteref-2046" epub:type="noteref">2046</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For truly there is none among us all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If any wight will claw us on the gall,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2047" id="noteref-2047" epub:type="noteref">2047</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That will not kick, for that he saith us sooth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Assay,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2048" id="noteref-2048" epub:type="noteref">2048</a> and he shall find it, that so do’th.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For be we never so vicioús within,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We will be held both wise and clean of sin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And some men said, that great delight have we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For to be held stable and eke secré,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2049" id="noteref-2049" epub:type="noteref">2049</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in one purpose steadfastly to dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not bewray a thing that men us tell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that tale is not worth a rakë-stele.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2050" id="noteref-2050" epub:type="noteref">2050</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pardie, we women cannë nothing hele,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2051" id="noteref-2051" epub:type="noteref">2051</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Witness on Midas; will ye hear the tale?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ovid, amongës other thingës smale,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2052" id="noteref-2052" epub:type="noteref">2052</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saith, Midas had, under his longë hairs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Growing upon his head two ass’s ears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whichë vice he hid, as best he might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full subtlely from every man’s sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, save his wife, there knew of it no mo’;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lov’d her most, and trusted her also;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He prayed her, that to no creature</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She wouldë tellen of his disfigúre.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2053" id="noteref-2053" epub:type="noteref">2053</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>She swore him, nay, for all the world to win,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She would not do that villainy or sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make her husband have so foul a name:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She would not tell it for her owen shame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But natheless her thoughtë that she died,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she so longë should a counsel hide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her thought it swell’d so sore about her heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That needës must some word from her astart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, since she durst not tell it unto man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down to a marish fast thereby she ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till she came there, her heart was all afire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as a bittern bumbles<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2054" id="noteref-2054" epub:type="noteref">2054</a> in the mire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She laid her mouth unto the water down.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Bewray me not, thou water, with thy soun’,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2055" id="noteref-2055" epub:type="noteref">2055</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quoth she, “to thee I tell it, and no mo’,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine husband hath long ass’s earës two!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now is mine heart all whole; now is it out;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I might no longer keep it, out of doubt.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here may ye see, though we a time abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet out it must, we can no counsel hide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The remnant of the tale, if ye will hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Read in Ovíd, and there ye may it lear.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2056" id="noteref-2056" epub:type="noteref">2056</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This knight, of whom my tale is specially,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that he saw he might not come thereby⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is to say, what women love the most⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within his breast full sorrowful was his ghost.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2057" id="noteref-2057" epub:type="noteref">2057</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But home he went, for he might not sojourn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The day was come, that homeward he must turn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his way it happen’d him to ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all his care,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2058" id="noteref-2058" epub:type="noteref">2058</a> under a forest side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where as he saw upon a dancë go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ladies four-and-twenty, and yet mo’,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toward this ilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2059" id="noteref-2059" epub:type="noteref">2059</a> dance he drew full yern,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2060" id="noteref-2060" epub:type="noteref">2060</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hope that he some wisdom there should learn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But certainly, ere he came fully there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Y-vanish’d was this dance, he knew not where;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No creaturë saw he that bare life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save on the green he sitting saw a wife⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fouler wight there may no man devise.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2061" id="noteref-2061" epub:type="noteref">2061</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2062" id="noteref-2062" epub:type="noteref">2062</a> this knight this old wife gan to rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said, “Sir Knight, hereforth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2063" id="noteref-2063" epub:type="noteref">2063</a> lieth no way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell me what ye are seeking, by your fay.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2064" id="noteref-2064" epub:type="noteref">2064</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Paráventure it may the better be:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These oldë folk know muchë thing,” quoth she.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My levë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2065" id="noteref-2065" epub:type="noteref">2065</a> mother,” quoth this knight, “certáin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am but dead, but if<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2066" id="noteref-2066" epub:type="noteref">2066</a> that I can sayn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What thing it is that women most desire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could ye me wiss,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2067" id="noteref-2067" epub:type="noteref">2067</a> I would well quite your hire.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2068" id="noteref-2068" epub:type="noteref">2068</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Plight me thy troth here in mine hand,” quoth she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“The nextë thing that I require of thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt it do, if it be in thy might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I will tell it thee ere it be night.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Have here my trothë,” quoth the knight; “I grant.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thennë,” quoth she, “I dare me well avaunt,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2069" id="noteref-2069" epub:type="noteref">2069</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy life is safe, for I will stand thereby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon my life the queen will say as I:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let see, which is the proudest of them all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That wears either a kerchief or a caul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That dare say nay to that I shall you teach.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us go forth withoutë longer speech.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then rowned she a pistel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2070" id="noteref-2070" epub:type="noteref">2070</a> in his ear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bade him to be glad, and have no fear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When they were come unto the court, this knight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said, he had held his day, as he had hight,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2071" id="noteref-2071" epub:type="noteref">2071</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ready was his answer, as he said.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full many a noble wife, and many a maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many a widow, for that they be wise⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The queen herself sitting as a justíce⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Assembled be, his answer for to hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And afterward this knight was bid appear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To every wight commanded was silénce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that the knight should tell in audience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What thing that worldly women love the best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This knight he stood not still, as doth a beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to this questión anon answér’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With manly voice, that all the court it heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My liegë lady, generally,” quoth he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Women desire to have the sovereignty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As well over their husband as their love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for to be in mast’ry him above.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is your most desire, though ye me kill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do as you list, I am here at your will.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all the court there was no wife nor maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor widow, that contráried what he said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But said, he worthy was to have his life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with that word up start that oldë wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which that the knight saw sitting on the green.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Mercy,” quoth she, “my sovereign lady queen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere that your court departë, do me right.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I taughtë this answér unto this knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which he plighted me his trothë there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The firstë thing I would of him requere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would it do, if it lay in his might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before this court then pray I thee, Sir Knight,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quoth she, “that thou me take unto thy wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For well thou know’st that I have kept<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2072" id="noteref-2072" epub:type="noteref">2072</a> thy life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I say false, say nay, upon thy fay.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2073" id="noteref-2073" epub:type="noteref">2073</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>This knight answér’d, “Alas, and well-away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know right well that such was my behest.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2074" id="noteref-2074" epub:type="noteref">2074</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Goddë’s lovë choose a new request:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take all my good, and let my body go.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nay, then,” quoth she, “I shrew<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2075" id="noteref-2075" epub:type="noteref">2075</a> us bothë two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For though that I be old, and foul, and poor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I n’ould<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2076" id="noteref-2076" epub:type="noteref">2076</a> for all the metal nor the ore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That under earth is grave,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2077" id="noteref-2077" epub:type="noteref">2077</a> or lies above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if thy wife I were and eke thy love.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My love?” quoth he, “nay, my damnatión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! that any of my natión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should ever so foul disparáged be.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all for nought; the end is this, that he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Constrained was, that needs he must her wed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And take this oldë wife, and go to bed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now wouldë some men say paráventure,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2078" id="noteref-2078" epub:type="noteref">2078</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That for my negligence I do no cure<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2079" id="noteref-2079" epub:type="noteref">2079</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tell you all the joy and all th’ array</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That at the feast was made that ilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2080" id="noteref-2080" epub:type="noteref">2080</a> day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To which thing shortly answeren I shall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say there was no joy nor feast at all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was but heaviness and muchë sorrow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For privily he wed her on the morrow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all day after hid him as an owl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So woe was him, his wifë look’d so foul.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great was the woe the knight had in his thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he was with his wife to bed y-brought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wallow’d, and he turned to and fro.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This oldë wife lay smiling evermo’,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said, “Dear husband, <i xml:lang="la">benedicite</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fares every knight thus with his wife as ye?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is this the law of king Arthoúrë’s house?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is every knight of his thus dangerous?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2081" id="noteref-2081" epub:type="noteref">2081</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am your owen love, and eke your wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am she, which that saved hath your life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And certes yet did I you ne’er unright.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why fare ye thus with me this firstë night?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye farë like a man had lost his wit.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What is my guilt? for God’s love tell me it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And it shall be amended, if I may.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Amended!” quoth this knight; “alas, nay, nay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It will not be amended, never mo’;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art so loathly, and so old also,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thereto<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2082" id="noteref-2082" epub:type="noteref">2082</a> comest of so low a kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That little wonder though I wallow and wind;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2083" id="noteref-2083" epub:type="noteref">2083</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>So wouldë God, mine heartë wouldë brest!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2084" id="noteref-2084" epub:type="noteref">2084</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Is this,” quoth she, “the cause of your unrest?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Yea, certainly,” quoth he; “no wonder is.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now, Sir,” quoth she, “I could amend all this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that me list, ere it were dayës three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So well ye mightë bear you unto me.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2085" id="noteref-2085" epub:type="noteref">2085</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, for ye speaken of such gentleness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As is descended out of old richéss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That therefore shallë ye be gentlemen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such arrogancy is not worth a hen.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2086" id="noteref-2086" epub:type="noteref">2086</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look who that is most virtuous alway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prive and apert,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2087" id="noteref-2087" epub:type="noteref">2087</a> and most intendeth aye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To do the gentle deedës that he can;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And take him for the greatest gentleman.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Christ will,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2088" id="noteref-2088" epub:type="noteref">2088</a> we claim of him our gentleness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not of our elders<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2089" id="noteref-2089" epub:type="noteref">2089</a> for their old richéss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For though they gave us all their heritage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which we claim to be of high parage,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2090" id="noteref-2090" epub:type="noteref">2090</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet may they not bequeathë, for no thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To none of us, their virtuous living</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That made them gentlemen called to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bade us follow them in such degree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well can the wisë poet of Florence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hightë Dante, speak of this senténce:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2091" id="noteref-2091" epub:type="noteref">2091</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, in such manner<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2092" id="noteref-2092" epub:type="noteref">2092</a> rhyme is Dante’s tale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Full seld’ upriseth by his branches smale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prowess of man, for God of his goodness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wills that we claim of him our gentleness;’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2093" id="noteref-2093" epub:type="noteref">2093</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For of our elders may we nothing claim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But temp’ral things that man may hurt and maim.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eke every wight knows this as well as I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If gentleness were planted naturally</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto a certain lineage down the line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prive and apert, then would they never fine<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2094" id="noteref-2094" epub:type="noteref">2094</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To do of gentleness the fair offíce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then might they do no villainy nor vice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take fire, and bear it to the darkest house</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betwixt this and the mount of Caucasus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let men shut the doorës, and go thenne,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2095" id="noteref-2095" epub:type="noteref">2095</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet will the fire as fair and lightë brenne<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2096" id="noteref-2096" epub:type="noteref">2096</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As twenty thousand men might it behold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its office natural aye will it hold⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2097" id="noteref-2097" epub:type="noteref">2097</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>On peril of my life⁠—till that it die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here may ye see well how that gentery<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2098" id="noteref-2098" epub:type="noteref">2098</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is not annexed to possessión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since folk do not their operatión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alway, as doth the fire, lo, in its kind.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2099" id="noteref-2099" epub:type="noteref">2099</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, God it wot, men may full often find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lordë’s son do shame and villainy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he that will have price<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2100" id="noteref-2100" epub:type="noteref">2100</a> of his gent’ry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2101" id="noteref-2101" epub:type="noteref">2101</a> he was boren of a gentle house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And had his elders noble and virtuoús,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And will himselfë do no gentle deedës,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor follow his gentle ancestry, that dead is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is not gentle, be he duke or earl;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For villain sinful deedës make a churl.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For gentleness is but the renomée<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2102" id="noteref-2102" epub:type="noteref">2102</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thine ancéstors, for their high bounté,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2103" id="noteref-2103" epub:type="noteref">2103</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which is a strangë thing to thy persón:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy gentleness cometh from God alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then comes our very<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2104" id="noteref-2104" epub:type="noteref">2104</a> gentleness of grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was no thing bequeath’d us with our place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Think how noble, as saith Valerius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was thilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2105" id="noteref-2105" epub:type="noteref">2105</a> Tullius Hostilius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That out of povert’ rose to high nobless.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Read in Senec, and read eke in Boece,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There shall ye see express, that it no drede<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2106" id="noteref-2106" epub:type="noteref">2106</a> is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he is gentle that doth gentle deedës.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore, levë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2107" id="noteref-2107" epub:type="noteref">2107</a> husband, I conclude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Albeit that mine ancestors were rude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet may the highë God⁠—and so hope I⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grant me His grace to live virtuously:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then am I gentle when that I begin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To live virtuously, and waivë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2108" id="noteref-2108" epub:type="noteref">2108</a> sin.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And whereas ye of povert’ me repreve,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2109" id="noteref-2109" epub:type="noteref">2109</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The highë God, on whom that we believe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In wilful povert’ chose to lead his life:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And certes, every man, maiden, or wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May understand that Jesus, heaven’s king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne would not choose a virtuous living.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glad povert’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2110" id="noteref-2110" epub:type="noteref">2110</a> is an honest thing, certáin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This will Senec and other clerkës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2111" id="noteref-2111" epub:type="noteref">2111</a> sayn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whoso that holds him paid of<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2112" id="noteref-2112" epub:type="noteref">2112</a> his povért’,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hold him rich, though he hath not a shirt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He that covéteth is a poorë wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he would have what is not in his might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he that nought hath, nor covéteth t’ have,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is rich, although ye hold him but a knave.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2113" id="noteref-2113" epub:type="noteref">2113</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Very povért’ is sinnë, properly.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2114" id="noteref-2114" epub:type="noteref">2114</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Juvenal saith of povert’ merrily:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The poorë man, when he goes by the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the thievës he may sing and play.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2115" id="noteref-2115" epub:type="noteref">2115</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Povért’ is hateful good;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2116" id="noteref-2116" epub:type="noteref">2116</a> and, as I guess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A full great bringer out of business;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2117" id="noteref-2117" epub:type="noteref">2117</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>A great amender eke of sapience</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To him that taketh it in patience.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Povert’ is this, although it seem elenge,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2118" id="noteref-2118" epub:type="noteref">2118</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Possessión that no wight will challénge.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Povert’ full often, when a man is low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Makes him his God and eke himself to know:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Povert’ a spectacle is,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2119" id="noteref-2119" epub:type="noteref">2119</a> as thinketh me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through which he may his very<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2120" id="noteref-2120" epub:type="noteref">2120</a> friendës see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, therefore, Sir, since that I you not grieve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of my povert’ no morë me repreve.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Now, Sir, of eldë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2121" id="noteref-2121" epub:type="noteref">2121</a> ye reprevë me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And certes, Sir, though none authority<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2122" id="noteref-2122" epub:type="noteref">2122</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were in no book, ye gentles of honoúr</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say, that men should an oldë wight honoúr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And call him father, for your gentleness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And authors shall I finden, as I guess.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now there ye say that I am foul and old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then dread ye not to be a cokëwold.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2123" id="noteref-2123" epub:type="noteref">2123</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For filth, and eldë, all so may I thé,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2124" id="noteref-2124" epub:type="noteref">2124</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be greatë wardens upon chastity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But natheless, since I know your delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall fulfil your wordly appetite.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Choose now,” quoth she, “one of these thingës tway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To have me foul and old till that I dey,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2125" id="noteref-2125" epub:type="noteref">2125</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And be to you a truë humble wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And never you displease in all my life:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ellës will ye have me young and fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And take your áventure of the repair<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2126" id="noteref-2126" epub:type="noteref">2126</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That shall be to your house because of me⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or in some other place, it may well be?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now choose yourselfë whether that you liketh.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This knight adviseth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2127" id="noteref-2127" epub:type="noteref">2127</a> him, and sore he siketh,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2128" id="noteref-2128" epub:type="noteref">2128</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But at the last he said in this mannére;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My lady and my love, and wife so dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I put me in your wisë governance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Choose for yourself which may be most pleasance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And most honoúr to you and me also;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I do no force<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2129" id="noteref-2129" epub:type="noteref">2129</a> the whether of the two:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as you liketh, it sufficeth me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Then have I got the mastery,” quoth she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Since I may choose and govern as me lest.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2130" id="noteref-2130" epub:type="noteref">2130</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Yea, certes wife,” quoth he, “I hold it best.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Kiss me,” quoth she, “we are no longer wroth,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2131" id="noteref-2131" epub:type="noteref">2131</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For by my troth I will be to you both;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is to say, yea, bothë fair and good.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray to God that I may stervë wood,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2132" id="noteref-2132" epub:type="noteref">2132</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2133" id="noteref-2133" epub:type="noteref">2133</a> I to you be all so good and true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ever was wife since the world was new;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And but<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2134" id="noteref-2134" epub:type="noteref">2134</a> I be to-morrow as fair to seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As any lady, emperess or queen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is betwixt the East and eke the West,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do with my life and death right as you lest.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2135" id="noteref-2135" epub:type="noteref">2135</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cast up the curtain, and look how it is.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And when the knight saw verily all this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she so fair was, and so young thereto,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For joy he hent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2136" id="noteref-2136" epub:type="noteref">2136</a> her in his armës two:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His heartë bathed in a bath of bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand times on row<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2137" id="noteref-2137" epub:type="noteref">2137</a> he gan her kiss:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she obeyed him in every thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That mightë do him pleasance or liking.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus they live unto their livës’ end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In perfect joy; and Jesus Christ us send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Husbandës meek and young, and fresh in bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And grace to overlive them that we wed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke I pray Jesus to short their lives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That will not be govérned by their wives.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And old and angry niggards of dispence,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2138" id="noteref-2138" epub:type="noteref">2138</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>God send them soon a very pestilence!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
