<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Reeve’s Tale</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:poem">
		<section id="the-reeves-tale" epub:type="division">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Reeve’s Tale</h2>
			<section id="the-reeves-tale-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Prologue</h3>
				<p>
					<span>WHEN folk had laughed all at this nice case</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Absolon and Hendy Nicholas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Diverse folk diversely they said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for the more part they laugh'd and play'd;* *were diverted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at this tale I saw no man him grieve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But it were only Osewold the Reeve.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because he was of carpenteres craft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little ire is in his hearte laft*; *left</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He gan to grudge* and blamed it a lite.** *murmur **little.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"So the* I," quoth he, "full well could I him quite** *thrive **match</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With blearing* of a proude miller's eye, *dimming &lt;1&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that me list to speak of ribaldry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I am old; me list not play for age; &lt;2&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grass time is done, my fodder is now forage.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This white top* writeth mine olde years; *head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine heart is also moulded* as mine hairs; *grown mouldy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I do fare as doth an open-erse*; *medlar &lt;3&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ilke* fruit is ever longer werse, *same</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till it be rotten *in mullok or in stre*. *on the ground or in straw*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We olde men, I dread, so fare we;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till we be rotten, can we not be ripe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We hop* away, while that the world will pipe; *dance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in our will there sticketh aye a nail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To have an hoary head and a green tail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As hath a leek; for though our might be gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our will desireth folly ever-in-one*: *continually</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For when we may not do, then will we speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet in our ashes cold does fire reek.* *smoke&lt;4&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Four gledes* have we, which I shall devise**, *coals ** describe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vaunting, and lying, anger, covetise*. *covetousness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These foure sparks belongen unto eld.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our olde limbes well may be unweld*, *unwieldy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But will shall never fail us, that is sooth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet have I alway a coltes tooth,&lt;5&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As many a year as it is passed and gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since that my tap of life began to run;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For sickerly*, when I was born, anon *certainly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death drew the tap of life, and let it gon:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever since hath so the tap y-run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till that almost all empty is the tun.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stream of life now droppeth on the chimb.&lt;6&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silly tongue well may ring and chime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of wretchedness, that passed is full yore*: *long</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With olde folk, save dotage, is no more. &lt;7&gt;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When that our Host had heard this sermoning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He gan to speak as lordly as a king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said; "To what amounteth all this wit?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What? shall we speak all day of holy writ?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The devil made a Reeve for to preach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As of a souter* a shipman, or a leach**. *cobbler &lt;8&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say forth thy tale, and tarry not the time: **surgeon &lt;9&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo here is Deptford, and 'tis half past prime:&lt;10&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo Greenwich, where many a shrew is in.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It were high time thy tale to begin."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Now, sirs," quoth then this Osewold the Reeve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray you all that none of you do grieve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though I answer, and somewhat set his hove*, *hood &lt;11&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For lawful is *force off with force to shove.* *to repel force</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This drunken miller hath y-told us here by force*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How that beguiled was a carpentere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Paraventure* in scorn, for I am one: *perhaps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, by your leave, I shall him quite anon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right in his churlish termes will I speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray to God his necke might to-break.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He can well in mine eye see a stalk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in his own he cannot see a balk."&lt;12&gt;</span>
				</p>
				<p>Notes to the Prologue to the Reeves Tale.</p>
				<p>1. "With blearing of a proude miller's eye": dimming his eye; playing off a joke on him.</p>
				<p>2. "Me list not play for age": age takes away my zest for drollery.</p>
				<p>3. The medlar, the fruit of the mespilus tree, is only edible when rotten.</p>
				<p>4. Yet in our ashes cold does fire reek: "ev'n in our ashes live their wonted fires."</p>
				<p>5. A colt's tooth; a wanton humour, a relish for pleasure.</p>
				<p>6. Chimb: The rim of a barrel where the staves project beyond the head.</p>
				<p>7. With olde folk, save dotage, is no more: Dotage is all that is left them; that is, they can only dwell fondly, dote, on the past.</p>
				<p>8. Souter: cobbler; Scottice, "sutor;"' from Latin, "suere," to sew.</p>
				<p>9. "Ex sutore medicus" (a surgeon from a cobbler) and "ex sutore nauclerus" (a seaman or pilot from a cobbler) were both proverbial expressions in the Middle Ages.</p>
				<p>10. Half past prime: half-way between prime and tierce; about half-past seven in the morning.</p>
				<p>11. Set his hove; like "set their caps;" as in the description of the Manciple in the Prologue, who "set their aller cap". "Hove" or "houfe," means "hood;" and the phrase signifies to be even with, outwit.</p>
				<p>12. The illustration of the mote and the beam, from Matthew.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-reeves-tale-main" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Tale&lt;1&gt;</h3>
				<p>
					<span>At Trompington, not far from Cantebrig,* *Cambridge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There goes a brook, and over that a brig,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the whiche brook there stands a mill:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this is *very sooth* that I you tell. *complete truth*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A miller was there dwelling many a day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As any peacock he was proud and gay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pipen he could, and fish, and nettes bete*, *prepare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And turne cups, and wrestle well, and shete*. *shoot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye by his belt he bare a long pavade*, *poniard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of his sword full trenchant was the blade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A jolly popper* bare he in his pouch; *dagger</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was no man for peril durst him touch.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Sheffield whittle* bare he in his hose. *small knife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round was his face, and camuse* was his nose. *flat &lt;2&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As pilled* as an ape's was his skull. *peeled, bald.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was a market-beter* at the full. *brawler</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There durste no wight hand upon him legge*, *lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he ne swore anon he should abegge*. *suffer the penalty</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A thief he was, for sooth, of corn and meal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that a sly, and used well to steal.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His name was *hoten deinous Simekin* *called "Disdainful Simkin"*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wife he hadde, come of noble kin:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The parson of the town her father was.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With her he gave full many a pan of brass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that Simkin should in his blood ally.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was y-foster'd in a nunnery:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Simkin woulde no wife, as he said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But she were well y-nourish'd, and a maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To saven his estate and yeomanry:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she was proud, and pert as is a pie*. *magpie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A full fair sight it was to see them two;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On holy days before her would he go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his tippet* y-bound about his head; *hood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she came after in a gite* of red, *gown &lt;3&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Simkin hadde hosen of the same.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There durste no wight call her aught but Dame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>None was so hardy, walking by that way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That with her either durste *rage or play*, *use freedom*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>*But if* he would be slain by Simekin *unless</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With pavade, or with knife, or bodekin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For jealous folk be per'lous evermo':</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Algate* they would their wives *wende so*. *unless *so behave*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke for she was somewhat smutterlich*, *dirty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was as dign* as water in a ditch, *nasty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all so full of hoker*, and bismare**. *ill-nature **abusive speech</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her thoughte that a lady should her spare*, *not judge her hardly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What for her kindred, and her nortelrie* *nurturing, education</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she had learned in the nunnery.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>One daughter hadde they betwixt them two</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of twenty year, withouten any mo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saving a child that was of half year age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In cradle it lay, and was a proper page.* *boy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This wenche thick and well y-growen was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With camuse* nose, and eyen gray as glass; *flat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With buttocks broad, and breastes round and high;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But right fair was her hair, I will not lie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The parson of the town, for she was fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In purpose was to make of her his heir</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both of his chattels and his messuage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And *strange he made it* of her marriage. *he made it a matter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His purpose was for to bestow her high of difficulty*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into some worthy blood of ancestry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For holy Church's good may be dispended* *spent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On holy Church's blood that is descended.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore he would his holy blood honour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though that he holy Churche should devour.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Great soken* hath this miller, out of doubt, *toll taken for grinding</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With wheat and malt, of all the land about;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And namely* there was a great college *especially</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men call the Soler Hall at Cantebrege,&lt;4&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was their wheat and eke their malt y-ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on a day it happed in a stound*, *suddenly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sick lay the manciple* of a malady, *steward &lt;5&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men *weened wisly* that he shoulde die. *thought certainly*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which this miller stole both meal and corn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An hundred times more than beforn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For theretofore he stole but courteously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now he was a thief outrageously.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which the warden chid and made fare*, *fuss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thereof *set the miller not a tare*; *he cared not a rush*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He *crack'd his boast,* and swore it was not so. *talked big*</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then were there younge poore scholars two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That dwelled in the hall of which I say;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Testif* they were, and lusty for to play; *headstrong &lt;6&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And only for their mirth and revelry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the warden busily they cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To give them leave for but a *little stound*, *short time*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To go to mill, and see their corn y-ground:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hardily* they durste lay their neck, *boldly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The miller should not steal them half a peck</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of corn by sleight, nor them by force bereave* *take away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the last the warden give them leave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>John hight the one, and Alein hight the other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of one town were they born, that highte Strother,&lt;7&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far in the North, I cannot tell you where.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Alein he made ready all his gear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on a horse the sack he cast anon:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forth went Alein the clerk, and also John,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With good sword and with buckler by their side.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>John knew the way, him needed not no guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the mill the sack adown he lay'th.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Alein spake first; "All hail, Simon, in faith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How fares thy faire daughter, and thy wife."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Alein, welcome," quoth Simkin, "by my life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And John also: how now, what do ye here?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"By God, Simon," quoth John, "need has no peer*. *equal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him serve himself behoves that has no swain*, *servant</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or else he is a fool, as clerkes sayn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our manciple I hope* he will be dead, *expect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So workes aye the wanges* in his head: *cheek-teeth &lt;8&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore is I come, and eke Alein,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To grind our corn and carry it home again:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray you speed us hence as well ye may."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"It shall be done," quoth Simkin, "by my fay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What will ye do while that it is in hand?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"By God, right by the hopper will I stand,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quoth John, "and see how that the corn goes in.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet saw I never, by my father's kin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How that the hopper wagges to and fro."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alein answered, "John, and wilt thou so?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then will I be beneathe, by my crown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And see how that the meale falls adown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the trough, that shall be my disport*: *amusement</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, John, in faith I may be of your sort;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I is as ill a miller as is ye."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This miller smiled at their nicety*, *simplicity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thought, "All this is done but for a wile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They weenen* that no man may them beguile, *think</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But by my thrift yet shall I blear their eye,&lt;9&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all the sleight in their philosophy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The more *quainte knackes* that they make, *odd little tricks*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The more will I steal when that I take.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instead of flour yet will I give them bren*. *bran</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The greatest clerks are not the wisest men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As whilom to the wolf thus spake the mare: &lt;10&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all their art ne count I not a tare."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out at the door he went full privily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that he saw his time, softely.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He looked up and down, until he found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The clerkes' horse, there as he stood y-bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behind the mill, under a levesell:* *arbour&lt;11&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the horse he went him fair and well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stripped off the bridle right anon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when the horse was loose, he gan to gon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toward the fen, where wilde mares run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forth, with "Wehee!" through thick and eke through thin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This miller went again, no word he said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But did his note*, and with these clerkes play'd, *business &lt;12&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till that their corn was fair and well y-ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when the meal was sacked and y-bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then John went out, and found his horse away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gan to cry, "Harow, and well-away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our horse is lost: Alein, for Godde's bones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Step on thy feet; come off, man, all at once:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! our warden has his palfrey lorn.*" *lost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Alein all forgot, both meal and corn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All was out of his mind his husbandry*. *careful watch over</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"What, which way is he gone?" he gan to cry. the corn*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wife came leaping inward at a renne*, *run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She said; "Alas! your horse went to the fen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With wilde mares, as fast as he could go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unthank* come on his hand that bound him so *ill luck, a curse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his that better should have knit the rein."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Alas!" quoth John, "Alein, for Christes pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay down thy sword, and I shall mine also.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I is full wight*, God wate**, as is a roe. *swift **knows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Godde's soul he shall not scape us bathe*. *both &lt;13&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why n' had thou put the capel* in the lathe**? *horse&lt;14&gt; **barn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ill hail, Alein, by God thou is a fonne.*" *fool</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These silly clerkes have full fast y-run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toward the fen, both Alein and eke John;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when the miller saw that they were gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He half a bushel of their flour did take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bade his wife go knead it in a cake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said; I trow, the clerkes were afeard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet can a miller *make a clerkes beard,* *cheat a scholar* &lt;15&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all his art: yea, let them go their way!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo where they go! yea, let the children play:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They get him not so lightly, by my crown."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These silly clerkes runnen up and down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With "Keep, keep; stand, stand; jossa*, warderere. *turn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go whistle thou, and I shall keep* him here." *catch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But shortly, till that it was very night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They coulde not, though they did all their might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their capel catch, he ran alway so fast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till in a ditch they caught him at the last.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Weary and wet, as beastes in the rain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comes silly John, and with him comes Alein.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Alas," quoth John, "the day that I was born!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now are we driv'n till hething* and till scorn. *mockery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our corn is stol'n, men will us fonnes* call, *fools</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both the warden, and eke our fellows all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And namely* the miller, well-away!" *especially</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus plained John, as he went by the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toward the mill, and Bayard* in his hand. *the bay horse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The miller sitting by the fire he fand*. *found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For it was night, and forther* might they not, *go their way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for the love of God they him besought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of herberow* and ease, for their penny. *lodging</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The miller said again," If there be any,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as it is, yet shall ye have your part.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine house is strait, but ye have learned art;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye can by arguments maken a place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mile broad, of twenty foot of space.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let see now if this place may suffice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or make it room with speech, as is your guise.*" *fashion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Now, Simon," said this John, "by Saint Cuthberd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aye is thou merry, and that is fair answer'd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have heard say, man shall take of two things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as he findes, or such as he brings.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But specially I pray thee, hoste dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gar &lt;16&gt; us have meat and drink, and make us cheer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we shall pay thee truly at the full:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With empty hand men may not hawkes tull*. *allure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo here our silver ready for to spend."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This miller to the town his daughter send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ale and bread, and roasted them a goose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bound their horse, he should no more go loose:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And them in his own chamber made a bed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sheetes and with chalons* fair y-spread, *blankets&lt;17&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not from his owen bed ten foot or twelve:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His daughter had a bed all by herselve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right in the same chamber *by and by*: *side by side*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It might no better be, and cause why,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was no *roomer herberow* in the place. *roomier lodging*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They suppen, and they speaken of solace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drinken ever strong ale at the best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aboute midnight went they all to rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well had this miller varnished his head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full pale he was, fordrunken, and *nought red*. *without his wits*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He yoxed*, and he spake thorough the nose, *hiccuped</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he were in the quakke*, or in the pose**. *grunting **catarrh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bed he went, and with him went his wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As any jay she light was and jolife,* *jolly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So was her jolly whistle well y-wet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cradle at her beddes feet was set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To rock, and eke to give the child to suck.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when that drunken was all in the crock* *pitcher&lt;18&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bedde went the daughter right anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bedde went Alein, and also John.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was no more; needed them no dwale.&lt;19&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This miller had, so wisly* bibbed ale, *certainly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That as a horse he snorted in his sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor of his tail behind he took no keep*. *heed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His wife bare him a burdoun*, a full strong; *bass &lt;20&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men might their routing* hearen a furlong. *snoring</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The wenche routed eke for company.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alein the clerk, that heard this melody,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He poked John, and saide: "Sleepest thou?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heardest thou ever such a song ere now?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo what a compline&lt;21&gt; is y-mell* them all. *among</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wilde fire upon their bodies fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who hearken'd ever such a ferly* thing? *strange &lt;22&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea, they shall have the flow'r of ill ending!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This longe night there *tides me* no rest. *comes to me*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But yet no force*, all shall be for the best. *matter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, John," said he, "as ever may I thrive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that I may, yon wenche will I swive*. *enjoy carnally</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some easement* has law y-shapen** us *satisfaction **provided</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, John, there is a law that sayeth thus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That if a man in one point be aggriev'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in another he shall be relievd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our corn is stol'n, soothly it is no nay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And we have had an evil fit to-day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And since I shall have none amendement</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against my loss, I will have easement:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Godde's soul, it shall none, other be."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This John answer'd; Alein, *avise thee*: *have a care*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The miller is a perilous man," he said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"And if that he out of his sleep abraid*, *awaked</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He mighte do us both a villainy*." *mischief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alein answer'd; "I count him not a fly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And up he rose, and by the wench he crept.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This wenche lay upright, and fast she slept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till he so nigh was, ere she might espy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it had been too late for to cry:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, shortly for to say, they were at one.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now play, Alein, for I will speak of John.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This John lay still a furlong way &lt;23&gt; or two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to himself he made ruth* and woe. *wail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Alas!" quoth he, "this is a wicked jape*; *trick</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now may I say, that I is but an ape.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet has my fellow somewhat for his harm;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He has the miller's daughter in his arm:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He auntred* him, and hath his needes sped, *adventured</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I lie as a draff-sack in my bed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when this jape is told another day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall be held a daffe* or a cockenay &lt;24&gt; *coward</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will arise, and auntre* it, by my fay: *attempt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unhardy is unsely, &lt;25&gt; as men say."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And up he rose, and softely he went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the cradle, and in his hand it hent*, *took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bare it soft unto his beddes feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon after this the wife *her routing lete*, *stopped snoring*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gan awake, and went her out to piss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And came again and gan the cradle miss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And groped here and there, but she found none.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Alas!" quoth she, "I had almost misgone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I had almost gone to the clerkes' bed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ey! Benedicite, then had I foul y-sped."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And forth she went, till she the cradle fand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She groped alway farther with her hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And found the bed, and *thoughte not but good* *had no suspicion*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because that the cradle by it stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wist not where she was, for it was derk;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But fair and well she crept in by the clerk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lay full still, and would have caught a sleep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within a while this John the Clerk up leap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on this goode wife laid on full sore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So merry a fit had she not had *full yore*. *for a long time*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He pricked hard and deep, as he were mad.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This jolly life have these two clerkes had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till that the thirde cock began to sing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alein wax'd weary in the morrowing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he had swonken* all the longe night, *laboured</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saide; "Farewell, Malkin, my sweet wight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The day is come, I may no longer bide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But evermore, where so I go or ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I is thine owen clerk, so have I hele.*" *health</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Now, deare leman*," quoth she, "go, fare wele: *sweetheart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ere thou go, one thing I will thee tell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that thou wendest homeward by the mill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right at the entry of the door behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt a cake of half a bushel find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was y-maked of thine owen meal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which that I help'd my father for to steal.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And goode leman, God thee save and keep."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with that word she gan almost to weep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alein uprose and thought, "Ere the day daw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will go creepen in by my fellaw:"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And found the cradle with his hand anon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"By God!" thought he, "all wrong I have misgone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My head is *totty of my swink* to-night, *giddy from my labour*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That maketh me that I go not aright.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wot well by the cradle I have misgo';</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here lie the miller and his wife also."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And forth he went a twenty devil way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the bed, there as the miller lay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He ween'd* t' have creeped by his fellow John, *thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by the miller in he crept anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And caught him by the neck, and gan him shake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said; "Thou John, thou swines-head, awake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Christes soul, and hear a noble game!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For by that lord that called is Saint Jame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I have thries in this shorte night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swived the miller's daughter bolt-upright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While thou hast as a coward lain aghast*." *afraid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Thou false harlot," quoth the miller, "hast?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, false traitor, false clerk," quoth he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Thou shalt be dead, by Godde's dignity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who durste be so bold to disparage* *disgrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My daughter, that is come of such lineage?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by the throate-ball* he caught Alein, *Adam's apple</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he him hent* dispiteously** again, *seized **angrily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the nose he smote him with his fist;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down ran the bloody stream upon his breast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the floor with nose and mouth all broke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They wallow, as do two pigs in a poke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And up they go, and down again anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till that the miller spurned* on a stone, *stumbled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And down he backward fell upon his wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That wiste nothing of this nice strife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she was fall'n asleep a little wight* *while</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With John the clerk, that waked had all night:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with the fall out of her sleep she braid*. *woke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Help, holy cross of Bromeholm," &lt;26&gt; she said;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"In manus tuas! &lt;27&gt; Lord, to thee I call.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awake, Simon, the fiend is on me fall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine heart is broken; help; I am but dead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There li'th one on my womb and on mine head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Help, Simkin, for these false clerks do fight"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This John start up as fast as e'er he might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And groped by the walles to and fro</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To find a staff; and she start up also,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And knew the estres* better than this John, *apartment</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by the wall she took a staff anon:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saw a little shimmering of a light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For at an hole in shone the moone bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by that light she saw them both the two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But sickerly* she wist not who was who, *certainly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as she saw a white thing in her eye.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when she gan this white thing espy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She ween'd* the clerk had wear'd a volupere**; *supposed **night-cap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with the staff she drew aye nere* and nere*, *nearer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ween'd to have hit this Alein at the full,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And smote the miller on the pilled* skull; *bald</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That down he went, and cried," Harow! I die."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These clerkes beat him well, and let him lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And greithen* them, and take their horse anon, *make ready, dress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke their meal, and on their way they gon:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the mill door eke they took their cake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of half a bushel flour, full well y-bake.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus is the proude miller well y-beat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hath y-lost the grinding of the wheat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And payed for the supper *every deal* *every bit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Alein and of John, that beat him well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His wife is swived, and his daughter als*; *also</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, such it is a miller to be false.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore this proverb is said full sooth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"*Him thar not winnen well* that evil do'th, *he deserves not to gain*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A guiler shall himself beguiled be:"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And God that sitteth high in majesty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save all this Company, both great and smale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus have I quit* the Miller in my tale. *made myself quits with</span>
				</p>
				<p>Notes to the Reeve's Tale</p>
				<p>1. The incidents of this tale were much relished in the Middle Ages, and are found under various forms. Boccaccio has told them in the ninth day of his "Decameron".</p>
				<p>2. Camuse: flat; French "camuse", snub-nosed.</p>
				<p>3. Gite: gown or coat; French "jupe."</p>
				<p>4. Soler Hall: the hall or college at Cambridge with the gallery or upper storey; supposed to have been Clare Hall. (Transcribers note: later commentators identify it with King's Hall, now merged with Trinity College)</p>
				<p>5. Manciple: steward; provisioner of the hall. See also note 47 to the prologue to the Tales.</p>
				<p>6. Testif: headstrong, wild-brained; French, "entete."</p>
				<p>7. Strother: Tyrwhitt points to Anstruther, in Fife: Mr Wright to the Vale of Langstroth, in the West Riding of Yorkshire. Chaucer has given the scholars a dialect that may have belonged to either district, although it more immediately suggests the more northern of the two. (Transcribers note: later commentators have identified it with a now vanished village near Kirknewton in Northumberland. There was a well-known Alein of Strother in Chaucer's lifetime.)</p>
				<p>8. Wanges: grinders, cheek-teeth; Anglo-Saxon, "Wang," the cheek; German, "Wange."</p>
				<p>9. See note 1 to the Prologue to the Reeves Tale</p>
				<p>10. In the "Cento Novelle Antiche," the story is told of a mule, which pretends that his name is written on the bottom of his hind foot. The wolf attempts to read it, the mule kills him with a kick in the forehead; and the fox, looking on, remarks that "every man of letters is not wise." A similar story is told in "Reynard the Fox."</p>
				<p>11. Levesell: an arbour; Anglo-Saxon, "lefe-setl," leafy seat.</p>
				<p>12. Noth: business; German, "Noth," necessity.</p>
				<p>13. Bathe: both; Scottice, "baith."</p>
				<p>14. Capel: horse; Gaelic, "capall;" French, "cheval;" Italian, "cavallo," from Latin, "caballus."</p>
				<p>15. Make a clerkes beard: cheat a scholar; French, "faire la barbe;" and Boccaccio uses the proverb in the same sense.</p>
				<p>16. "Gar" is Scotch for "cause;" some editions read, however, "get us some".</p>
				<p>17. Chalons: blankets, coverlets, made at Chalons in France.</p>
				<p>18. Crock: pitcher, cruse; Anglo-Saxon, "crocca;" German, "krug;" hence "crockery."</p>
				<p>19. Dwale: night-shade, Solanum somniferum, given to cause sleep.</p>
				<p>20. Burdoun: bass; "burden" of a song. It originally means the drone of a bagpipe; French, "bourdon."</p>
				<p>21. Compline: even-song in the church service; chorus.</p>
				<p>22. Ferly: strange. In Scotland, a "ferlie" is an unwonted or remarkable sight.</p>
				<p>23. A furlong way: As long as it might take to walk a furlong.</p>
				<p>24. Cockenay: a term of contempt, probably borrowed from the kitchen; a cook, in base Latin, being termed "coquinarius." compare French "coquin," rascal.</p>
				<p>25. Unhardy is unsely: the cowardly is unlucky; "nothing venture, nothing have;" German, "unselig," unhappy.</p>
				<p>26. Holy cross of Bromeholm: A common adjuration at that time; the cross or rood of the priory of Bromholm, in Norfolk, was said to contain part of the real cross and therefore held in high esteem.</p>
				<p>27. In manus tuas: Latin, "in your hands".</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
