<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Second Nun’s Tale</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:poem">
		<section id="the-second-nuns-tale" epub:type="division">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Second Nun’s Tale<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4437" id="noteref-4437" epub:type="noteref">4437</a></h2>
			<p>
				<span>The minister and norice<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4438" id="noteref-4438" epub:type="noteref">4438</a> unto vices,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which that men call in English idleness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The porter at the gate is of delices;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4439" id="noteref-4439" epub:type="noteref">4439</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>T’ eschew, and by her contrar’ her oppress⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That is to say, by lawful business<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4440" id="noteref-4440" epub:type="noteref">4440</a>⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well oughtë we to do our all intent,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4441" id="noteref-4441" epub:type="noteref">4441</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest that the fiend through idleness us hent.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4442" id="noteref-4442" epub:type="noteref">4442</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For he, that with his thousand cordës sly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Continually us waiteth to beclap,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4443" id="noteref-4443" epub:type="noteref">4443</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he may man in idleness espy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He can so lightly catch him in his trap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till that a man be hent right by the lappe,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4444" id="noteref-4444" epub:type="noteref">4444</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>He is not ware the fiend hath him in hand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well ought we work, and idleness withstand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And though men dreaded never for to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet see men well by reason, doubtëless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That idleness is root of sluggardý,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of which there cometh never good increase;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And see that sloth them holdeth in a leas,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4445" id="noteref-4445" epub:type="noteref">4445</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only to sleep, and for to eat and drink,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to devouren all that others swink.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4446" id="noteref-4446" epub:type="noteref">4446</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And, for to put us from such idleness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That cause is of so great confusión,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have here done my faithful business,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the Legend, in translatión</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right of thy glorious life and passión⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou with thy garland wrought of rose and lily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee mean I, maid and martyr, Saint Cecílie.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And thou, thou art the flow’r of virgins all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of whom that Bernard list so well to write,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4447" id="noteref-4447" epub:type="noteref">4447</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thee at my beginning first I call;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou comfort of us wretches, do me indite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy maiden’s death, that won through her meríte</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Th’ eternal life, and o’er the fiend victóry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As man may after readen in her story.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou maid and mother, daughter of thy Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou well of mercy, sinful soulës’ cure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In whom that God of bounté chose to won;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4448" id="noteref-4448" epub:type="noteref">4448</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou humble and high o’er every creatúre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou nobilest, so far forth our natúre,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4449" id="noteref-4449" epub:type="noteref">4449</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That no disdain the Maker had of kind,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4450" id="noteref-4450" epub:type="noteref">4450</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>His Son in blood and flesh to clothe and wind.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4451" id="noteref-4451" epub:type="noteref">4451</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Within the cloister of thy blissful sidës</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took mannë’s shape th’ eternal love and peace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That of the trinë compass<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4452" id="noteref-4452" epub:type="noteref">4452</a> Lord and guide is;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom earth, and sea, and heav’n, out of release,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4453" id="noteref-4453" epub:type="noteref">4453</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aye hery;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4454" id="noteref-4454" epub:type="noteref">4454</a> and thou, Virgin wemmëless,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4455" id="noteref-4455" epub:type="noteref">4455</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bare of thy body, and dweltest maiden pure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Creatór of every creatúre.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Assembled is in thee magnificence<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4456" id="noteref-4456" epub:type="noteref">4456</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>With mercy, goodness, and with such pitý,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou, that art the sun of excellence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not only helpest them that pray to thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But oftentime, of thy benignity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full freely, ere that men thine help beseech,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou go’st before, and art their livës’ leech.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4457" id="noteref-4457" epub:type="noteref">4457</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now help, thou meek and blissful fairë maid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Me, flemed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4458" id="noteref-4458" epub:type="noteref">4458</a> wretch, in this desért of gall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think on the woman Cananée that said</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That whelpës eat some of the crumbës all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That from their Lordë’s table be y-fall;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4459" id="noteref-4459" epub:type="noteref">4459</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though that I, unworthy son of Eve,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4460" id="noteref-4460" epub:type="noteref">4460</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be sinful, yet acceptë my believe.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4461" id="noteref-4461" epub:type="noteref">4461</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And, for that faith is dead withoutë werkës,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For to workë give me wit and space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I be quit from thennes that most derk is;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4462" id="noteref-4462" epub:type="noteref">4462</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>O thou, that art so fair and full of grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be thou mine advocate in that high place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where as withouten end is sung Osanne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou Christë’s mother, daughter dear of Anne.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And of thy light my soul in prison light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That troubled is by the contagión</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my bodý, and also by the weight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of earthly lust and false affectión;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O hav’n of refuge, O salvatión</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of them that be in sorrow and distress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now help, for to my work I will me dress.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet pray I you, that readë what I write,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4463" id="noteref-4463" epub:type="noteref">4463</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forgive me that I do no diligence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This ilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4464" id="noteref-4464" epub:type="noteref">4464</a> story subtilly t’ indite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For both have I the wordës and senténce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of him that at the saintë’s reverence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The story wrote, and follow her legénd;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pray you that you will my work amend.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>First will I you the name of Saint Cecílie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Expound, as men may in her story see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is to say in English, Heaven’s lily,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4465" id="noteref-4465" epub:type="noteref">4465</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For purë chasteness of virginity;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, for she whiteness had of honesty,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4466" id="noteref-4466" epub:type="noteref">4466</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And green of consciénce, and of good fame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sweetë savour, Lilie was her name.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Or Cecilie is to say, the way of blind;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4467" id="noteref-4467" epub:type="noteref">4467</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For she example was by good teachíng;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or else Cecilie, as I written find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is joined by a manner conjoiníng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heaven and <em>Lia</em>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4468" id="noteref-4468" epub:type="noteref">4468</a> and herein figuríng</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heaven is set for thought of holiness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And <em>Lia</em> for her lasting business.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Cecilie may eke be said in this mannére,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wanting of blindness, for her greatë light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of sapience, and for her thewës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4469" id="noteref-4469" epub:type="noteref">4469</a> clear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or ellës, lo, this maiden’s name bright</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of heaven and <em>Leos</em> comes, for which by right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men might her well the heaven of people call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Example of good and wisë workës all;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For <em>Leos</em> people<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4470" id="noteref-4470" epub:type="noteref">4470</a> in English is to say;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4471" id="noteref-4471" epub:type="noteref">4471</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And right as men may in the heaven see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sun and moon, and starrës every way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right so men ghostly,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4472" id="noteref-4472" epub:type="noteref">4472</a> in this maiden free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sawen of faith the magnanimitý,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eke the clearness whole of sapiénce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sundry workës bright of excellence.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And right so as these philosóphers write,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That heav’n is swift and round, and eke burning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right so was fairë Cecilíe the white</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full swift and busy in every good workíng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And round and whole<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4473" id="noteref-4473" epub:type="noteref">4473</a> in good perséveríng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And burning ever in charity full bright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now have I you declared what she hight.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4474" id="noteref-4474" epub:type="noteref">4474</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This maiden bright Cecile, as her life saith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was come of Romans, and of noble kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from her cradle foster’d in the faith</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Christ, and bare his Gospel in her mind:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She never ceased, as I written find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of her prayére, and God to love and dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beseeching him to keep her maidenhead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And when this maiden should unto a man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Y-wedded be, that was full young of age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which that y-called was Valerian,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And comë was the day of marriáge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She, full devout and humble in her coráge,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4475" id="noteref-4475" epub:type="noteref">4475</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under her robe of gold, that sat full fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had next her flesh y-clad her in an hair.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4476" id="noteref-4476" epub:type="noteref">4476</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And while the organs madë melody,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To God alone thus in her heart sang she;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O Lord, my soul and eke my body gie<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4477" id="noteref-4477" epub:type="noteref">4477</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwemmed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4478" id="noteref-4478" epub:type="noteref">4478</a> lest that I confounded be.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, for his love that died upon the tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Every second or third day she fast’,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aye bidding<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4479" id="noteref-4479" epub:type="noteref">4479</a> in her orisons full fast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The night came, and to beddë must she gon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her husbánd, as it is the mannére;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And privily she said to him anon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O sweet and well-beloved spousë dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is a counsel,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4480" id="noteref-4480" epub:type="noteref">4480</a> an’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4481" id="noteref-4481" epub:type="noteref">4481</a> ye will it hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which that right fain I would unto you say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that ye swear ye will it not bewray.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Valerian gan fast unto her swear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That for no case nor thing that mightë be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He never should to none bewrayen her;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then at erst<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4482" id="noteref-4482" epub:type="noteref">4482</a> thus to him saidë she;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I have an angel which that loveth me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That with great love, whether I wake or sleep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is ready aye my body for to keep;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And if that he may feelen, out of dread,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4483" id="noteref-4483" epub:type="noteref">4483</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ye me touch or love in villainy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He right anon will slay you with the deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in your youthë thus ye shouldë die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if that ye in cleanë love me gie,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4484" id="noteref-4484" epub:type="noteref">4484</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>He will you love as me, for your cleannéss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shew to you his joy and his brightnéss.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Valerian, corrected as God wo’ld,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Answer’d again, “If I shall trustë thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me that angel see, and him behold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if that it a very angel be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then will I do as thou hast prayed me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if thou love another man, forsooth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right with this sword then will I slay you both.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Cecile answér’d anon right in this wise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If that you list, the angel shall ye see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that ye trow<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4485" id="noteref-4485" epub:type="noteref">4485</a> Of Christ, and you baptise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go forth to Via Appia,” quoth she,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That from this townë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4486" id="noteref-4486" epub:type="noteref">4486</a> stands but milës three,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the poorë folkës that there dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say them right thus, as that I shall you tell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Tell them, that I, Cecile, you to them sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To shewë you the good Urban the old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For secret needës,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4487" id="noteref-4487" epub:type="noteref">4487</a> and for good intent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when that ye Saint Urban have behold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell him the wordës which I to you told;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when that he hath purged you from sin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then shall ye see that angel ere ye twin.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4488" id="noteref-4488" epub:type="noteref">4488</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Valerian is to the placë gone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, right as he was taught by her learning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He found this holy old Urban anon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the saintës’ burials louting;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4489" id="noteref-4489" epub:type="noteref">4489</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he anon, withoutë tarrying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did his messáge, and when that he it told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Urban for joy his handës gan uphold.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The tearës from his eyen let he fall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Almighty Lord, O Jesus Christ,” quoth he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sower of chaste counsél, herd<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4490" id="noteref-4490" epub:type="noteref">4490</a> of us all;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fruit of thilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4491" id="noteref-4491" epub:type="noteref">4491</a> seed of chastity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou hast sown in Cecile, take to thee:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo, like a busy bee, withoutë guile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee serveth aye thine owen thrall<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4492" id="noteref-4492" epub:type="noteref">4492</a> Cicile.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“For thilkë spousë, that she took but new,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4493" id="noteref-4493" epub:type="noteref">4493</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full like a fierce lión, she sendeth here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As meek as e’er was any lamb to ewe.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with that word anon there gan appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An old man, clad in whitë clothës clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That had a book with letters of gold in hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gan before Valerian to stand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Valerian, as dead, fell down for dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he him saw; and he up hent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4494" id="noteref-4494" epub:type="noteref">4494</a> him tho,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4495" id="noteref-4495" epub:type="noteref">4495</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on his book right thus he gan to read;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“One Lord, one faith, one God withoutë mo’,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One Christendom, one Father of all alsó,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aboven all, and over all everywhere.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These wordës all with gold y-written were.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When this was read, then said this oldë man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Believ’st thou this or no? say yea or nay.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I believe all this,” quoth Valerian,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“For soother<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4496" id="noteref-4496" epub:type="noteref">4496</a> thing than this, I dare well say,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the Heaven no wight thinkë may.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then vanish’d the old man, he wist not where;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Pope Urban him christened right there.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Valerian went home, and found Cecílie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within his chamber with an angel stand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This angel had of roses and of lily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coronës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4497" id="noteref-4497" epub:type="noteref">4497</a> two, the which he bare in hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And first to Cecile, as I understand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gave the one, and after gan he take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other to Valerian her make.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4498" id="noteref-4498" epub:type="noteref">4498</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“With body clean, and with unwemmed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4499" id="noteref-4499" epub:type="noteref">4499</a> thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keep aye well these coronës two,” quoth he;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“From Paradise to you I have them brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor ever morë shall they rotten<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4500" id="noteref-4500" epub:type="noteref">4500</a> be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor lose their sweetë savour, trustë me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor ever wight shall see them with his eye,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4501" id="noteref-4501" epub:type="noteref">4501</a> he be chaste, and hatë villainy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And thou, Valerian, for thou so soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assented hast to good counsél, also</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say what thee list, and thou shalt have thy boon.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4502" id="noteref-4502" epub:type="noteref">4502</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I have a brother,” quoth Valerian tho,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4503" id="noteref-4503" epub:type="noteref">4503</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That in this world I love no man so;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I pray you that my brother may have grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To know the truth, as I do in this place.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The angel said, “God liketh thy request,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bothë, with the palm of martyrdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye shallë come unto this blissful rest.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, with that word, Tiburce his brother came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when that he the savour undernome<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4504" id="noteref-4504" epub:type="noteref">4504</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which that the roses and the lilies cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within his heart he gan to wonder fast;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And said; “I wonder, this time of the year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whencë that sweetë savour cometh so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of rose and lilies, that I smellë here;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For though I had them in mine handës two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The savour might in me no deeper go;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sweetë smell, that in my heart I find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath changed me all in another kind.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4505" id="noteref-4505" epub:type="noteref">4505</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Valerian said, “Two crownës here have we,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snow-white and rosë-red, that shinë clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which that thine eyen have no might to see;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, as thou smellest them through my prayére,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So shalt thou see them, levë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4506" id="noteref-4506" epub:type="noteref">4506</a> brother dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If it so be thou wilt withoutë sloth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Believe aright, and know the very troth.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4507" id="noteref-4507" epub:type="noteref">4507</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Tiburce answéred, “Say’st thou this to me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In soothness, or in dreamë hear I this?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“In dreamës,” quoth Valerian, “have we be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto this timë, brother mine, y-wis:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4508" id="noteref-4508" epub:type="noteref">4508</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now at erst<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4509" id="noteref-4509" epub:type="noteref">4509</a> in truth our dwelling is.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“How know’st thou this,” quoth Tiburce; “in what wise?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quoth Valerián, “That shall I thee devise.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4510" id="noteref-4510" epub:type="noteref">4510</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The angel of God hath me the truth y-taught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which thou shalt see, if that thou wilt reny<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4511" id="noteref-4511" epub:type="noteref">4511</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The idols, and be clean, and ellës nought.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>[<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4512" id="noteref-4512" epub:type="noteref">4512</a>And of the mirácle of these crownës tway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saint Ambrose in his preface list to say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Solemnëly this noble doctor dear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Commendeth it, and saith in this mannére:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The palm of martyrdom for to receive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saint Cecilie, full filled of God’s gift,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The world and eke her chamber gan to weive;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4513" id="noteref-4513" epub:type="noteref">4513</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Witness Tiburce’s and Cecilie’s shrift,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4514" id="noteref-4514" epub:type="noteref">4514</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>To which God of his bounty wouldë shift<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4515" id="noteref-4515" epub:type="noteref">4515</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coronës two, of flowers well smellíng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made his angel them the crownës bring.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The maid hath brought these men to bliss above;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The world hath wist what it is worth, certáin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Devotión of chastity to love.”]</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then showed him Cecilie all open and plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That idols all are but a thing in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For they be dumb, and thereto<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4516" id="noteref-4516" epub:type="noteref">4516</a> they be deave;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4517" id="noteref-4517" epub:type="noteref">4517</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And charged him his idols for to leave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Whoso that trow’th<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4518" id="noteref-4518" epub:type="noteref">4518</a> not this, a beast he is,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quoth this Tiburce, “if that I shall not lie.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she gan kiss his breast when she heard this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And was full glad he could the truth espy:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“This day I takë thee for mine ally.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4519" id="noteref-4519" epub:type="noteref">4519</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saidë this blissful fairë maiden dear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after that she said as ye may hear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Lo, right so as the love of Christ,” quoth she,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Made me thy brother’s wife, right in that wise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anon for mine allý here take I thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since that thou wilt thine idolës despise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go with thy brother now and thee baptise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make thee clean, so that thou may’st behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The angel’s face, of which thy brother told.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Tiburce answér’d, and saidë, “Brother dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First tell me whither I shall, and to what man?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“To whom?” quoth he, “come forth with goodë cheer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will thee lead unto the Pope Urbán.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“To Urban? brother mine Valerián,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quoth then Tiburce; “wilt thou me thither lead?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Me thinketh that it were a wondrous deed.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Meanest thou not that Urban,” quoth he tho,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4520" id="noteref-4520" epub:type="noteref">4520</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That is so often damned to be dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wons<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4521" id="noteref-4521" epub:type="noteref">4521</a> in halkës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4522" id="noteref-4522" epub:type="noteref">4522</a> always to and fro,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dare not onës puttë forth his head?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men should him brennen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4523" id="noteref-4523" epub:type="noteref">4523</a> in a fire so red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If he were found, or if men might him spy:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And us also, to bear him companý.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And while we seekë that Divinity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That is y-hid in heaven privily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Algatë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4524" id="noteref-4524" epub:type="noteref">4524</a> burnt in this world should we be.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom Cecilie answer’d boldëly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Men mightë dreadë well and skilfully<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4525" id="noteref-4525" epub:type="noteref">4525</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>This life to lose, mine owen dearë brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If this were living only, and none other.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But there is better life in other place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That never shall be lostë, dread thee nought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which Goddë’s Son us toldë through his grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Father’s Son which allë thingës wrought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all that wrought is with a skilful<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4526" id="noteref-4526" epub:type="noteref">4526</a> thought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Ghost,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4527" id="noteref-4527" epub:type="noteref">4527</a> that from the Father gan proceed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath souled<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4528" id="noteref-4528" epub:type="noteref">4528</a> them, withouten any drede.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4529" id="noteref-4529" epub:type="noteref">4529</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“By word and by mirácle, high God’s Son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he was in this world, declared here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That there is other life where men may won.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4530" id="noteref-4530" epub:type="noteref">4530</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom answér’d Tiburce, “O sister dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saidest thou not right now in this mannére,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was but one God, Lord in soothfastness,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4531" id="noteref-4531" epub:type="noteref">4531</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now of three how may’st thou bear witnéss?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“That shall I tell,” quoth she, “ere that I go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right as a man hath sapiénces three,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Memory, engine,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4532" id="noteref-4532" epub:type="noteref">4532</a> and intellect also,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So in one being of divinity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three personës there mayë right well be.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then gan she him full busily to preach</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Christë’s coming, and his painës teach,</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And many pointës of his passión;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How Goddë’s Son in this world was withhold<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4533" id="noteref-4533" epub:type="noteref">4533</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>To do mankindë plein<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4534" id="noteref-4534" epub:type="noteref">4534</a> remissión,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That was y-bound in sin and carës cold.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4535" id="noteref-4535" epub:type="noteref">4535</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>All this thing she unto Tiburcë told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after that Tiburce, in good intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Valerián to Pope Urban he went;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>That thanked God, and with glad heart and light</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He christen’d him, and made him in that place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perféct in his learníng, and Goddë’s knight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after this Tiburcë got such grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That every day he saw in time and space</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Th’ angel of God, and every manner boon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4536" id="noteref-4536" epub:type="noteref">4536</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That be God asked, it was sped<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4537" id="noteref-4537" epub:type="noteref">4537</a> full soon.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>It were full hard by order for to sayn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How many wonders Jesus for them wrought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But at the last, to tellë short and plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sergeants of the town of Rome them sought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And them before Almach the Prefect brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which them appos’d,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4538" id="noteref-4538" epub:type="noteref">4538</a> and knew all their intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to th’ imáge of Jupiter them sent;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And said, “Whoso will not do sacrifice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swap<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4539" id="noteref-4539" epub:type="noteref">4539</a> off his head, this is my sentence here.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anon these martyrs, that I you devise,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4540" id="noteref-4540" epub:type="noteref">4540</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>One Maximus, that was an officére</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the preféct’s, and his corniculére,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4541" id="noteref-4541" epub:type="noteref">4541</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Them hent,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4542" id="noteref-4542" epub:type="noteref">4542</a> and when he forth the saintës lad,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4543" id="noteref-4543" epub:type="noteref">4543</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself he wept for pity that he had.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When Maximus had heard the saintës’ lore,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4544" id="noteref-4544" epub:type="noteref">4544</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>He got him of the tormentorës leave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And led them to his house withoutë more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with their preaching, ere that it were eve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They gonnen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4545" id="noteref-4545" epub:type="noteref">4545</a> from the tórmentors to reave,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4546" id="noteref-4546" epub:type="noteref">4546</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from Maxim’, and from his folk each one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The falsë faith, to trow<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4547" id="noteref-4547" epub:type="noteref">4547</a> in God alone.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Cecilia came, when it was waxen night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With priestës, that them christen’d all in fere;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4548" id="noteref-4548" epub:type="noteref">4548</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And afterward, when day was waxen light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cecile them said with a full steadfast cheer,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4549" id="noteref-4549" epub:type="noteref">4549</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now, Christë’s owen knightës lefe<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4550" id="noteref-4550" epub:type="noteref">4550</a> and dear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast all away the workës of darknéss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And armë you in armour of brightnéss.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ye have forsooth y-done a great battaile;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your course is done,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4551" id="noteref-4551" epub:type="noteref">4551</a> your faith have ye conserved;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go to the crown of life that may not fail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rightful Judgë, which that ye have served,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall give it you, as ye have it deserved.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when this thing was said, as I devise,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4552" id="noteref-4552" epub:type="noteref">4552</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men led them forth to do the sacrifice.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But when they were unto the placë brought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tellë shortly the conclusión,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They would incénse nor sacrifice right nought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But on their knees they settë them adown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With humble heart and sad<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4553" id="noteref-4553" epub:type="noteref">4553</a> devotión,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lostë both their headës in the place;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4554" id="noteref-4554" epub:type="noteref">4554</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their soulës wentë to the King of grace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This Maximus, that saw this thing betide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With piteous tearës told it anon right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he their soulës saw to heaven glide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With angels, full of clearness and of light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with his word converted many a wight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For which Almachius did him to-beat<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4555" id="noteref-4555" epub:type="noteref">4555</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>With whip of lead, till he his life gan lete.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4556" id="noteref-4556" epub:type="noteref">4556</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Cecile him took, and buried him anon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Tiburce and Valerian softëly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within their burying-place, under the stone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after this Almachius hastily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bade his ministers fetchen openly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cecile, so that she might in his presénce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do sacrifice, and Jupiter incénse.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4557" id="noteref-4557" epub:type="noteref">4557</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But they, converted at her wisë lore,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4558" id="noteref-4558" epub:type="noteref">4558</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weptë full sore, and gavë full credénce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto her word, and criëd more and more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Christ, Goddë’s Son, withoutë difference,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is very God, this is all our senténce,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4559" id="noteref-4559" epub:type="noteref">4559</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hath so good a servant him to serve:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus with one voice we trowë,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4560" id="noteref-4560" epub:type="noteref">4560</a> though we sterve.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4561" id="noteref-4561" epub:type="noteref">4561</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Almachius, that heard of this doíng,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bade fetch Cecilie, that he might her see;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And alderfirst,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4562" id="noteref-4562" epub:type="noteref">4562</a> lo, this was his askíng;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What manner woman artë thou?” quoth he.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I am a gentle woman born,” quoth she.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I askë thee,” quoth he, “though it thee grieve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thy religion and of thy believe.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ye have begun your question foolishly,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quoth she, “that wouldest two answérs conclude</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In one demand? ye askë lewëdly.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4563" id="noteref-4563" epub:type="noteref">4563</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Almach answér’d to that similitude,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Of whencë comes thine answering so rude?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Of whencë?” quoth she, when that she was freined,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4564" id="noteref-4564" epub:type="noteref">4564</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Of consciénce, and of good faith unfeigned.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Almachius saidë; “Takest thou no heed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my powér?” and she him answer’d this;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Your might,” quoth she, “full little is to dread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For every mortal mannë’s power is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But like a bladder full of wind, y-wis;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4565" id="noteref-4565" epub:type="noteref">4565</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For with a needle’s point, when it is blow’,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May all the boast of it be laid full low.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Full wrongfully begunnest thou,” quoth he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And yet in wrong is thy perséveránce.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Know’st thou not how our mighty princes free</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have thus commanded and made ordinánce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That every Christian wight shall have penánce,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4566" id="noteref-4566" epub:type="noteref">4566</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>But if that he his Christendom withsay,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4567" id="noteref-4567" epub:type="noteref">4567</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And go all quit, if he will it renay?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4568" id="noteref-4568" epub:type="noteref">4568</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Your princes erren, as your nobley<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4569" id="noteref-4569" epub:type="noteref">4569</a> doth,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quoth then Cecile, “and with a wood<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4570" id="noteref-4570" epub:type="noteref">4570</a> senténce<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4571" id="noteref-4571" epub:type="noteref">4571</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye make us guilty, and it is not sooth:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4572" id="noteref-4572" epub:type="noteref">4572</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ye that knowë well our innocence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forasmuch as we do aye reverence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Christ, and for we bear a Christian name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye put on us a crime and eke a blame.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But we that knowë thilkë namë so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For virtuous, we may it not withsay.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Almach answered, “Choose one of these two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do sacrifice, or Christendom renay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou may’st now escapë by that way.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At which the holy blissful fairë maid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gan for to laugh, and to the judgë said;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O judge, confused in thy nicety,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4573" id="noteref-4573" epub:type="noteref">4573</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wouldest thou that I rény innocence?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To makë me a wicked wight,” quoth she,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Lo, he dissimuleth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4574" id="noteref-4574" epub:type="noteref">4574</a> here in audience;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stareth and woodeth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4575" id="noteref-4575" epub:type="noteref">4575</a> in his adverténce.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4576" id="noteref-4576" epub:type="noteref">4576</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom Almachius said, “Unsely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4577" id="noteref-4577" epub:type="noteref">4577</a> wretch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knowest thou not how far my might may stretch?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Have not our mighty princes to me given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea bothë power and eke authority</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To makë folk to dien or to liven?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why speakest thou so proudly then to me?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I speakë not but steadfastly,” quoth she,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not proudly, for I say, as for my side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We hatë deadly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4578" id="noteref-4578" epub:type="noteref">4578</a> thilkë vice of pride.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“And, if thou dreadë not a sooth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4579" id="noteref-4579" epub:type="noteref">4579</a> to hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then will I shew all openly by right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou hast made a full great leasing<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4580" id="noteref-4580" epub:type="noteref">4580</a> here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou say’st thy princes have thee given might</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both for to slay and for to quick<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4581" id="noteref-4581" epub:type="noteref">4581</a> a wight⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou that may’st not but only life bereave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast none other power nor no leave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But thou may’st say, thy princes have thee maked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Minister of death; for if thou speak of mo’,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou liest; for thy power is full naked.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Do away<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4582" id="noteref-4582" epub:type="noteref">4582</a> thy boldness,” said Almachius tho,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4583" id="noteref-4583" epub:type="noteref">4583</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And sacrifice to our gods, ere thou go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I reckë not what wrong that thou me proffer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I can suffer it as a philosópher.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But thosë wrongës may I not endure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou speak’st of our goddës here,” quoth he.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cecile answér’d, “O nicë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4584" id="noteref-4584" epub:type="noteref">4584</a> creatúre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou saidest no word, since thou spake to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I knew not therewith thy nicety,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4585" id="noteref-4585" epub:type="noteref">4585</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that thou wert in every manner wise<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4586" id="noteref-4586" epub:type="noteref">4586</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lewëd<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4587" id="noteref-4587" epub:type="noteref">4587</a> officer, a vain justíce.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“There lacketh nothing to thine outward eyen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou art blind; for thing that we see all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That it is stone, that men may well espyen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4588" id="noteref-4588" epub:type="noteref">4588</a> stone a god thou wilt it call.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I rede<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4589" id="noteref-4589" epub:type="noteref">4589</a> thee let thine hand upon it fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And taste<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4590" id="noteref-4590" epub:type="noteref">4590</a> it well, and stone thou shalt it find;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since that thou see’st not with thine eyen blind.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“It is a shamë that the people shall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So scornë thee, and laugh at thy follý;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For commonly men wot it well over all,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4591" id="noteref-4591" epub:type="noteref">4591</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That mighty God is in his heaven high;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And these imáges, well may’st thou espy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thee nor to themselves may not profíte,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in effect they be not worth a mite.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>These wordës and such others saidë she,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he wax’d wroth, and bade men should her lead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Home to her house; “And in her house,” quoth he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Burn her right in a bath, with flamës red.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as he bade, right so was done the deed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in a bath they gan her fastë shetten,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4592" id="noteref-4592" epub:type="noteref">4592</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And night and day great fire they under betten.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4593" id="noteref-4593" epub:type="noteref">4593</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The longë night, and eke a day also,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all the fire, and eke the bathë’s heat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She sat all cold, and felt of it no woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It made her not one droppë for to sweat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in that bath her lifë she must lete.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4594" id="noteref-4594" epub:type="noteref">4594</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he, Almachius, with full wick’ intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To slay her in the bath his sondë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4595" id="noteref-4595" epub:type="noteref">4595</a> sent.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Three strokës in the neck he smote her tho,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4596" id="noteref-4596" epub:type="noteref">4596</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tórmentor,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4597" id="noteref-4597" epub:type="noteref">4597</a> but for no manner chance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He might not smite her fairë neck in two:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, for there was that time an ordinance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That no man shouldë do man such penánce,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4598" id="noteref-4598" epub:type="noteref">4598</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fourthë stroke to smitë, soft or sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This tórmentor he durstë do no more;</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But half dead, with her neckë carven<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4599" id="noteref-4599" epub:type="noteref">4599</a> there</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He let her lie, and on his way is went.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Christian folk, which that about her were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sheetës have the blood full fair y-hent;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4600" id="noteref-4600" epub:type="noteref">4600</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three dayës lived she in this tormént,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And never ceased them the faith to teach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That she had foster’d them, she gan to preach.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And them she gave her mebles<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4601" id="noteref-4601" epub:type="noteref">4601</a> and her thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the Pope Urban betook<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4602" id="noteref-4602" epub:type="noteref">4602</a> them tho;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4603" id="noteref-4603" epub:type="noteref">4603</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And said, “I askë this of heaven’s king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To have respite three dayës and no mo’,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To recommend to you, ere that I go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These soulës, lo; and that I might do wirch<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4604" id="noteref-4604" epub:type="noteref">4604</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here of mine house perpetually a church.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Saint Urban, with his deacons, privily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The body fetch’d, and buried it by night</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among his other saintës honestly;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4605" id="noteref-4605" epub:type="noteref">4605</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her house the church of Saint Cecilie hight;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4606" id="noteref-4606" epub:type="noteref">4606</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saint Urban hallow’d it, as he well might;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which unto this day, in noble wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men do to Christ and to his saint servíce.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
