<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Parson’s Tale</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-parsons-tale">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Parson’s Tale</h2>
			<section id="the-parsons-tale-prologue" epub:type="prologue z3998:poem">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Prologue</h3>
				<p>
					<span>By that the Manciple his tale had ended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sunnë from the south line was descended</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So lowë, that it was not to my sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Degreës nine-and-twenty as in height.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Four of the clock it was then, as I guess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For eleven foot, a little more or less,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My shadow was at thilkë time, as there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of such feet as my lengthë parted were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In six feet equal of proportión.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therewith the moonë’s exaltatión,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5028" id="noteref-5028" epub:type="noteref">5028</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>In meanë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5029" id="noteref-5029" epub:type="noteref">5029</a> Libra, gan alway ascend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As we were ent’ring at a thorpë’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5030" id="noteref-5030" epub:type="noteref">5030</a> end.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which our Host, as he was wont to gie,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5031" id="noteref-5031" epub:type="noteref">5031</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in this case, our jolly company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said in this wisë; “Lordings every one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now lacketh us no morë tales than one.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fulfill’d is my senténce and my decree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I trow that we have heard of each degree.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5032" id="noteref-5032" epub:type="noteref">5032</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Almost fulfilled is mine ordinance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray to God so give him right good chance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That telleth us this talë lustily.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sir Priest,” quoth he, “art thou a vicary?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5033" id="noteref-5033" epub:type="noteref">5033</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or art thou a Parson? say sooth by thy fay.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5034" id="noteref-5034" epub:type="noteref">5034</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be what thou be, breakë thou not our play;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5035" id="noteref-5035" epub:type="noteref">5035</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For every man, save thou, hath told his tale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unbuckle, and shew us what is in thy mail.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5036" id="noteref-5036" epub:type="noteref">5036</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For truëly me thinketh by thy cheer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shouldest knit up well a great mattére.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell us a fable anon, for cockë’s bones.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This Parson him answered all at ones;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thou gettest fable none y-told for me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Paul, that writeth unto Timothy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reproveth them that weivë soothfastness,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5037" id="noteref-5037" epub:type="noteref">5037</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tellë fables, and such wretchedness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should I sowë draff<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5038" id="noteref-5038" epub:type="noteref">5038</a> out of my fist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I may sowë wheat, if that me list?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which I say, if that you list to hear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Morality and virtuous mattére,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then that ye will give me audiénce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would full fain at Christë’s reverénce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do you pleasáncë lawful, as I can.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, trustë well, I am a southern man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot gest,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5039" id="noteref-5039" epub:type="noteref">5039</a> rom, ram, ruf,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5040" id="noteref-5040" epub:type="noteref">5040</a> by my letter;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, God wot, rhyme hold I but little better.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore if you list, I will not glose,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5041" id="noteref-5041" epub:type="noteref">5041</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will you tell a little tale in prose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To knit up all this feast, and make an end.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Jesus for his gracë wit me send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shewë you the way, in this voyáge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thilkë perfect glorious pilgrimage,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5042" id="noteref-5042" epub:type="noteref">5042</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hight Jerusalem celestiál.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if ye vouchësafe, anon I shall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Begin upon my tale, for which I pray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell your advice,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5043" id="noteref-5043" epub:type="noteref">5043</a> I can no better say.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But natheless this meditatión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I put it aye under correctión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of clerkës,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5044" id="noteref-5044" epub:type="noteref">5044</a> for I am not textuel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I take but the senténcë,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5045" id="noteref-5045" epub:type="noteref">5045</a> trust me well.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore I make a protestatión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I will standë to correctión.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Upon this word we have assented soon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, as us seemed, it was for to do’n,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5046" id="noteref-5046" epub:type="noteref">5046</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To enden in some virtuous senténce,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5047" id="noteref-5047" epub:type="noteref">5047</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for to give him space and audiénce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bade our Host he shouldë to him say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That allë we to tell his tale him pray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our Hostë had the wordës for us all:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Sir Priest,” quoth he, “now fairë you befall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say what you list, and we shall gladly hear.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with that word he said in this mannére;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Tellë,” quoth he, “your meditatioún,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But hasten you, the sunnë will adown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be fructuous,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5048" id="noteref-5048" epub:type="noteref">5048</a> and that in little space;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to do well God sendë you his grace.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-parsons-tale-body" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Tale<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5049" id="noteref-5049" epub:type="noteref">5049</a></h3>
				<p>[The Parson begins his “little treatise” (which, if given at length, would extend to about thirty of these pages, and which cannot by any stretch of courtesy or fancy be said to merit the title of a “Tale”) in these words:⁠—]</p>
				<p>Our sweet Lord God of Heaven, that no man will perish, but will that we come all to the knowledge of him, and to the blissful life that is perdurable,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5050" id="noteref-5050" epub:type="noteref">5050</a> admonishes us by the prophet Jeremiah, that saith in this wise: “Stand upon the ways, and see and ask of old paths, that is to say, of old sentences, which is the good way, and walk in that way, and ye shall find refreshing for your souls,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5051" id="noteref-5051" epub:type="noteref">5051</a> <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Many be the spiritual ways that lead folk to our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the reign of glory; of which ways there is a full noble way, and full convenable, which may not fail to man nor to woman, that through sin hath misgone from the right way of Jerusalem celestial; and this way is called penitence. Of which men should gladly hearken and inquire with all their hearts, to wit what is penitence, and whence it is called penitence, and in what manner, and in how many manners, be the actions or workings of penitence, and how many species there be of penitences, and what things appertain and behove to penitence, and what things disturb penitence.</p>
				<p>[Penitence is described, on the authority of Saints Ambrose, Isidore, and Gregory, as the bewailing of sin that has been wrought, with the purpose never again to do that thing, or any other thing which a man should bewail; for weeping and not ceasing to do the sin will not avail⁠—though it is to be hoped that after every time that a man falls, be it ever so often, he may find grace to arise through penitence. And repentant folk that leave their sin ere sin leave them, are accounted by Holy Church sure of their salvation, even though the repentance be at the last hour. There are three actions of penitence; that a man be baptized after he has sinned; that he do no deadly sin after receiving baptism; and that he fall into no venial sins from day to day. “Thereof saith <abbr>St.</abbr> Augustine, that penitence of good and humble folk is the penitence of every day.” The species of penitence are three: solemn, when a man is openly expelled from Holy Church in Lent, or is compelled by Holy Church to do open penance for an open sin openly talked of in the country; common penance, enjoined by priests in certain cases, as to go on pilgrimage naked or barefoot; and privy penance, which men do daily for private sins, of which they confess privately and receive private penance. To very perfect penitence are behoveful and necessary three things: contrition of heart, confession of mouth, and satisfaction; which are fruitful penitence against delight in thinking, reckless speech, and wicked sinful works.</p>
				<p>Penitence may be likened to a tree, having its root in contrition, biding itself in the heart as a tree-root does in the earth; out of this root springs a stalk, that bears branches and leaves of confession, and fruit of satisfaction. Of this root also springs a seed of grace, which is mother of all security, and this seed is eager and hot; and the grace of this seed springs of God, through remembrance on the day of judgment and on the pains of hell. The heat of this seed is the love of God, and the desire of everlasting joy; and this heat draws the heart of man to God, and makes him hate his sin. Penance is the tree of life to them that receive it. In penance or contrition man shall understand four things: what is contrition; what are the causes that move a man to contrition; how he should be contrite; and what contrition availeth to the soul. Contrition is the heavy and grievous sorrow that a man receiveth in his heart for his sins, with earnest purpose to confess and do penance, and never more to sin. Six causes ought to move a man to contrition: 1. He should remember him of his sins; 2. He should reflect that sin putteth a man in great thraldom, and all the greater the higher is the estate from which he falls; 3. He should dread the day of doom and the horrible pains of hell; 4. The sorrowful remembrance of the good deeds that man hath omitted to do here on earth, and also the good that he hath lost, ought to make him have contrition; 5. So also ought the remembrance of the passion that our Lord Jesus Christ suffered for our sins; 6. And so ought the hope of three things, that is to say, forgiveness of sin, the gift of grace to do well, and the glory of heaven with which God shall reward man for his good deeds.⁠—All these points the Parson illustrates and enforces at length; waxing especially eloquent under the third head, and plainly setting forth the sternly realistic notions regarding future punishments that were entertained in the time of Chaucer:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5052" id="noteref-5052" epub:type="noteref">5052</a>⁠—]</p>
				<p>Certes, all the sorrow that a man might make from the beginning of the world, is but a little thing, at retard of<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5053" id="noteref-5053" epub:type="noteref">5053</a> the sorrow of hell. The cause why that Job calleth hell the land of darkness;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5054" id="noteref-5054" epub:type="noteref">5054</a> understand, that he calleth it land or earth, for it is stable and never shall fail, and dark, for he that is in hell hath default<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5055" id="noteref-5055" epub:type="noteref">5055</a> of light natural; for certes the dark light, that shall come out of the fire that ever shall burn, shall turn them all to pain that be in hell, for it sheweth them the horrible devils that them torment. Covered with the darkness of death; that is to say, that he that is in hell shall have default of the sight of God; for certes the sight of God is the life perdurable.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5056" id="noteref-5056" epub:type="noteref">5056</a> The darkness of death, be the sins that the wretched man hath done, which that disturb<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5057" id="noteref-5057" epub:type="noteref">5057</a> him to see the face of God, right as a dark cloud doth between us and the sun. Land of misease, because there be three manner of defaults against three things that folk of this world have in this present life; that is to say, honours, delights, and riches. Against honour have they in hell shame and confusion: for well ye wot, that men call honour the reverence that man doth to man; but in hell is no honour nor reverence; for certes no more reverence shall be done there to a king than to a knave.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5058" id="noteref-5058" epub:type="noteref">5058</a> For which God saith by the prophet Jeremiah; “The folk that me despise shall be in despite.” Honour is also called great lordship. There shall no wight serve other, but of harm and torment. Honour is also called great dignity and highness; but in hell shall they be all fortrodden<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5059" id="noteref-5059" epub:type="noteref">5059</a> of devils. As God saith, “The horrible devils shall go and come upon the heads of damned folk;” and this is, forasmuch as the higher that they were in this present life, the more shall they be abated<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5060" id="noteref-5060" epub:type="noteref">5060</a> and defouled in hell. Against the riches of this world shall they have misease<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5061" id="noteref-5061" epub:type="noteref">5061</a> of poverty, and this poverty shall be in four things: in default<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5062" id="noteref-5062" epub:type="noteref">5062</a> of treasure; of which David saith, “The rich folk that embraced and oned<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5063" id="noteref-5063" epub:type="noteref">5063</a> all their heart to treasure of this world, shall sleep in the sleeping of death, and nothing shall they find in their hands of all their treasure.” And moreover, the misease of hell shall be in default of meat and drink. For God saith thus by Moses, “They shall be wasted with hunger, and the birds of hell shall devour them with bitter death, and the gall of the dragon shall be their drink, and the venom of the dragon their morsels.” And furthermore, their misease shall be in default of clothing, for they shall be naked in body, as of clothing, save the fire in which they burn, and other filths; and naked shall they be in soul, of all manner virtues, which that is the clothing of the soul. Where be then the gay robes, and the soft sheets, and the fine shirts? Lo, what saith of them the prophet Isaiah, that under them shall be strewed moths, and their covertures shall be of worms of hell. And furthermore, their misease shall be in default of friends, for he is not poor that hath good friends: but there is no friend; for neither God nor any good creature shall be friend to them, and evereach of them shall hate other with deadly hate. The Sons and the daughters shall rebel against father and mother, and kindred against kindred, and chide and despise each other, both day and night, as God saith by the prophet Micah. And the loving children, that whom loved so fleshly each other, would each of them eat the other if they might. For how should they love together in the pains of hell, when they hated each other in the prosperity of this life? For trust well, their fleshly love was deadly hate; as saith the prophet David; “Whoso loveth wickedness, he hateth his own soul:” and whoso hateth his own soul, certes he may love none other wight in no manner: and therefore in hell is no solace nor no friendship, but ever the more kindreds that be in hell, the more cursing, the more chiding, and the more deadly hate there is among them. And furtherover, they shall have default of all manner delights; for certes delights be after the appetites of the five wits;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5064" id="noteref-5064" epub:type="noteref">5064</a> as sight, hearing, smelling, savouring,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5065" id="noteref-5065" epub:type="noteref">5065</a> and touching. But in hell their sight shall be full of darkness and of smoke, and their eyes full of tears; and their hearing full of waimenting<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5066" id="noteref-5066" epub:type="noteref">5066</a> and grinting<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5067" id="noteref-5067" epub:type="noteref">5067</a> of teeth, as saith Jesus Christ; their nostrils shall be full of stinking; and, as saith Isaiah the prophet, their savouring<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5068" id="noteref-5068" epub:type="noteref">5068</a> shall be full of bitter gall; and touching of all their body shall be covered with fire that never shall quench, and with worms that never shall die, as God saith by the mouth of Isaiah. And forasmuch as they shall not ween<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5069" id="noteref-5069" epub:type="noteref">5069</a> that they may die for pain, and by death flee from pain, that may they understand in the word of Job, that saith, “There is the shadow of death.” Certes a shadow hath the likeness of the thing of which it is shadowed, but the shadow is not the same thing of which it is shadowed: right so fareth the pain of hell; it is like death, for the horrible anguish; and why? for it paineth them ever as though they should die anon; but certes they shall not die. For, as saith Saint Gregory, “To wretched caitiffs shall be given death without death, and end without end, and default without failing; for their death shall always live, and their end shall evermore begin, and their default shall never fail.” And therefore saith Saint John the Evangelist, “They shall follow death, and they shall not find him, and they shall desire to die, and death shall flee from them.” And eke Job saith, that in hell is no order of rule. And albeit that God hath created all things in right order, and nothing without order, but all things be ordered and numbered, yet nevertheless they that be damned be not in order, nor hold no order. For the earth shall bear them no fruit (for, as the prophet David saith, “God shall destroy the fruit of the earth, as for them”); nor water shall give them no moisture, nor the air no refreshing, nor the fire no light. For as saith Saint Basil, “The burning of the fire of this world shall God give in hell to them that be damned, but the light and the clearness shall be given in heaven to his children; right as the good man giveth flesh to his children, and bones to his hounds.” And for they shall have no hope to escape, saith Job at last, that there shall horror and grisly dread dwell without end. Horror is always dread of harm that is to come, and this dread shall ever dwell in the hearts of them that be damned. And therefore have they lost all their hope for seven causes. First, for God that is their judge shall be without mercy to them; nor they may not please him; nor none of his hallows;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5070" id="noteref-5070" epub:type="noteref">5070</a> nor they may give nothing for their ransom; nor they have no voice to speak to him; nor they may not flee from pain; nor they have no goodness in them that they may shew to deliver them from pain.</p>
				<p>[Under the fourth head, of good works, the Parson says:⁠—]</p>
				<p>The courteous Lord Jesus Christ will that no good work be lost, for in somewhat it shall avail. But forasmuch as the good works that men do while they be in good life be all amortised<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5071" id="noteref-5071" epub:type="noteref">5071</a> by sin following, and also since all the good works that men do while they be in deadly sin be utterly dead, as for to have the life perdurable, well may that man that no good works doth, sing that new French song, <i xml:lang="fr">J’ai tout perdu⁠—mon temps et mon labour</i>. For certes, sin bereaveth a man both the goodness of nature, and eke the goodness of grace. For soothly the grace of the Holy Ghost fareth like fire, that may not be idle; for fire faileth anon as it forleteth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5072" id="noteref-5072" epub:type="noteref">5072</a> its working, and right so grace faileth anon as it forleteth its working. Then loseth the sinful man the goodness of glory, that only is behight<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5073" id="noteref-5073" epub:type="noteref">5073</a> to good men that labour and work. Well may he be sorry then, that oweth all his life to God, as long as he hath lived, and also as long as he shall live, that no goodness hath to pay with his debt to God, to whom he oweth all his life: for trust well he shall give account, as saith Saint Bernard, of all the goods that have been given him in his present life, and how he hath them dispended, insomuch that there shall not perish an hair of his head, nor a moment of an hour shall not perish of his time, that he shall not give thereof a reckoning.</p>
				<p>[Having treated of the causes, the Parson comes to the manner, of contrition⁠—which should be universal and total, not merely of outward deeds of sin, but also of wicked delights and thoughts and words; “for certes Almighty God is all good, and therefore either he forgiveth all, or else right naught.” Further, contrition should be “wonder sorrowful and anguishous,” and also continual, with steadfast purpose of confession and amendment. Lastly, of what contrition availeth, the Parson says, that sometimes it delivereth man from sin; that without it neither confession nor satisfaction is of any worth; that it “destroyeth the prison of hell, and maketh weak and feeble all the strengths of the devils, and restoreth the gifts of the Holy Ghost and of all good virtues, and cleanseth the soul of sin, and delivereth it from the pain of hell, and from the company of the devil, and from the servage of sin, and restoreth it to all goods spiritual, and to the company and communion of Holy Church.” He who should set his intent to these things, would no longer be inclined to sin, but would give his heart and body to the service of Jesus Christ, and thereof do him homage. “For, certes, our Lord Jesus Christ hath spared us so benignly in our follies, that if he had not pity on man’s soul, a sorry song might we all sing.”</p>
				<p>The Second Part of the Parson’s Tale or Treatise opens with an explanation of what is confession⁠—which is termed “the second part of penitence, that is, sign of contrition;” whether it ought needs be done or not; and what things be convenable to true confession. Confession is true shewing of sins to the priest, without excusing, hiding, or forwrapping<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5074" id="noteref-5074" epub:type="noteref">5074</a> of anything, and without vaunting of good works. “Also, it is necessary to understand whence that sins spring, and how they increase, and which they be.” From Adam we took original sin; “from him fleshly descended be we all, and engendered of vile and corrupt matter;” and the penalty of Adam’s transgression dwelleth with us as to temptation, which penalty is called concupiscence. “This concupiscence, when it is wrongfully disposed or ordained in a man, it maketh him covet, by covetise of flesh, fleshly sin by sight of his eyes, as to earthly things, and also covetise of highness by pride of heart.” The Parson proceeds to shew how man is tempted in his flesh to sin; how, after his natural concupiscence, comes suggestion of the devil, that is to say the devil’s bellows, with which he bloweth in man the fire of con cupiscence; and how man then bethinketh him whether he will do or no the thing to which he is tempted. If he flame up into pleasure at the thought, and give way, then is he all dead in soul; “and thus is sin accomplished, by temptation, by delight, and by consenting; and then is the sin actual.” Sin is either venial, or deadly; deadly, when a man loves any creature more than Jesus Christ our Creator, venial, if he love Jesus Christ less than he ought. Venial sins diminish man’s love to God more and more, and may in this wise skip into deadly sin; for many small make a great. “And hearken this example: A great wave of the sea cometh sometimes with so great a violence, that it drencheth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5075" id="noteref-5075" epub:type="noteref">5075</a> the ship: and the same harm do sometimes the small drops, of water that enter through a little crevice in the thurrok,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5076" id="noteref-5076" epub:type="noteref">5076</a> and in the bottom of the ship, if men be so negligent that they discharge them not betimes. And therefore, although there be difference betwixt these two causes of drenching, algates<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5077" id="noteref-5077" epub:type="noteref">5077</a> the ship is dreint.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5078" id="noteref-5078" epub:type="noteref">5078</a> Right so fareth it sometimes of deadly sin,” and of venial sins when they multiply in a man so greatly as to make him love worldly things more than God. The Parson then enumerates specially a number of sins which many a man peradventure deems no sins, and confesses them not, and yet nevertheless they are truly sins:⁠—]</p>
				<p>This is to say, at every time that a man eateth and drinketh more than sufficeth to the sustenance of his body, in certain he doth sin; eke when he speaketh more than it needeth, he doth sin; eke when he heareth not benignly the complaint of the poor; eke when he is in health of body, and will not fast when other folk fast, without cause reasonable; eke when he sleepeth more than needeth, or when he cometh by that occasion too late to church, or to other works of charity; eke when he useth his wife without sovereign desire of engendrure, to the honour of God, or for the intent to yield his wife his debt of his body; eke when he will not visit the sick, or the prisoner, if he may; eke if he love wife, or child, or other worldly thing, more than reason requireth; eke if he flatter or blandish more than he ought for any necessity; eke if he minish or withdraw the alms of the poor; eke if he apparail<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5079" id="noteref-5079" epub:type="noteref">5079</a> his meat more deliciously than need is, or eat it too hastily by likerousness;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5080" id="noteref-5080" epub:type="noteref">5080</a> eke if he talk vanities in the church, or at God’s service, or that he be a talker of idle words of folly or villainy, for he shall yield account of them at the day of doom; eke when he behighteth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5081" id="noteref-5081" epub:type="noteref">5081</a> or assureth to do things that he may not perform; eke when that by lightness of folly he missayeth or scorneth his neighbour; eke when he hath any wicked suspicion of thing, that he wot of it no soothfastness: these things, and more without number, be sins, as saith Saint Augustine.</p>
				<p>[No earthly man may eschew all venial sins; yet may he refrain him, by the burning love that he hath to our Lord Jesus Christ, and by prayer and confession, and other good works, so that it shall but little grieve. “Furthermore, men may also refrain and put away venial sin, by receiving worthily the precious body of Jesus Christ; by receiving eke of holy water; by almsdeed; by general confession of Confiteor at mass, and at prime, and at compline;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5082" id="noteref-5082" epub:type="noteref">5082</a> and by blessing of bishops and priests, and by other good works.” The Parson then proceeds to weightier matters:⁠—]</p>
				<p>Now it is behovely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5083" id="noteref-5083" epub:type="noteref">5083</a> to tell which be deadly sins, that is to say, chieftains of sins; forasmuch as all they run in one leash, but in diverse manners. Now be they called chieftains, forasmuch as they be chief, and of them spring all other sins. The root of these sins, then, is pride, the general root of all harms. For of this root spring certain branches: as ire, envy, accidie<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5084" id="noteref-5084" epub:type="noteref">5084</a> or sloth, avarice or covetousness (to common understanding), gluttony, and lechery: and each of these sins hath his branches and his twigs, as shall be declared in their chapters following. And though so be, that no man can tell utterly the number of the twigs, and of the harms that come of pride, yet will I shew a part of them, as ye shall understand. There is inobedience, vaunting, hypocrisy, despite, arrogance, impudence, swelling of heart, insolence, elation, impatience, strife, contumacy, presumption, irreverence, pertinacity, vainglory and many another twig that I cannot tell nor declare⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>And yet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5085" id="noteref-5085" epub:type="noteref">5085</a> there is a privy species of pride that waiteth first to be saluted ere he will salute, all<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5086" id="noteref-5086" epub:type="noteref">5086</a> be he less worthy than that other is; and eke he waiteth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5087" id="noteref-5087" epub:type="noteref">5087</a> or desireth to sit or to go above him in the way, or kiss the pax,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5088" id="noteref-5088" epub:type="noteref">5088</a> or be incensed, or go to offering before his neighbour, and such semblable<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5089" id="noteref-5089" epub:type="noteref">5089</a> things, against his duty peradventure, but that he hath his heart and his intent in such a proud desire to be magnified and honoured before the people. Now be there two manner of prides; the one of them is within the heart of a man, and the other is without. Of which soothly these foresaid things, and more than I have said, appertain to pride that is within the heart of a man and there be other species of pride that be without: but nevertheless, the one of these species of pride is sign of the other, right as the gay levesell<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5090" id="noteref-5090" epub:type="noteref">5090</a> at the tavern is sign of the wine that is in the cellar. And this is in many things: as in speech and countenance, and outrageous array of clothing; for certes, if there had been no sin in clothing, Christ would not so soon have noted and spoken of the clothing of that rich man in the gospel. And Saint Gregory saith, that precious clothing is culpable for the dearth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5091" id="noteref-5091" epub:type="noteref">5091</a> of it, and for its softness, and for its strangeness and disguising, and for the superfluity or for the inordinate scantness of it; alas! may not a man see in our days the sinful costly array of clothing, and namely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5092" id="noteref-5092" epub:type="noteref">5092</a> in too much superfluity, or else in too disordinate scantness? As to the first sin, in superfluity of clothing, which that maketh it so dear, to the harm of the people, not only the cost of the embroidering, the disguising, indenting or barring, ounding, paling,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5093" id="noteref-5093" epub:type="noteref">5093</a> winding, or banding, and semblable<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5094" id="noteref-5094" epub:type="noteref">5094</a> waste of cloth in vanity; but there is also the costly furring<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5095" id="noteref-5095" epub:type="noteref">5095</a> in their gowns, so much punching of chisels to make holes, so much dagging<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5096" id="noteref-5096" epub:type="noteref">5096</a> of shears, with the superfluity in length of the foresaid gowns, trailing in the dung and in the mire, on horse and eke on foot, as well of man as of woman, that all that trailing is verily (as in effect) wasted, consumed, threadbare, and rotten with dung, rather than it is given to the poor, to great damage of the foresaid poor folk, and that in sundry wise: this is to say, the more that cloth is wasted, the more must it cost to the poor people for the scarceness; and furthermore, if so be that they would give such punched and dagged clothing to the poor people, it is not convenient to wear for their estate, nor sufficient to boot<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5097" id="noteref-5097" epub:type="noteref">5097</a> their necessity, to keep them from the distemperance<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5098" id="noteref-5098" epub:type="noteref">5098</a> of the firmament. Upon the other side, to speak of the horrible disordinate scantness of clothing, as be these cutted slops or hanselines,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5099" id="noteref-5099" epub:type="noteref">5099</a> that through their shortness cover not the shameful member of man, to wicked intent alas! some of them shew the boss and the shape of the horrible swollen members, that seem like to the malady of hernia, in the wrapping of their hosen, and eke the buttocks of them, that fare as it were the hinder part of a she-ape in the full of the moon. And more over the wretched swollen members that they shew through disguising, in departing<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5100" id="noteref-5100" epub:type="noteref">5100</a> of their hosen in white and red, seemeth that half their shameful privy members were flain.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5101" id="noteref-5101" epub:type="noteref">5101</a> And if so be that they depart their hosen in other colours, as is white and blue, or white and black, or black and red, and so forth; then seemeth it, by variance of colour, that the half part of their privy members be corrupt by the fire of Saint Anthony, or by canker, or other such mischance. And of the hinder part of their buttocks it is full horrible to see, for certes, in that part of their body where they purge their stinking ordure, that foul part shew they to the people proudly in despite of honesty,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5102" id="noteref-5102" epub:type="noteref">5102</a> which honesty Jesus Christ and his friends observed to shew in his life. Now as of the outrageous array of women, God wot, that though the visages of some of them seem full chaste and debonair,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5103" id="noteref-5103" epub:type="noteref">5103</a> yet notify they, in their array of attire, likerousness and pride. I say not that honesty<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5104" id="noteref-5104" epub:type="noteref">5104</a> in clothing of man or woman unconvenable but, certes, the superfluity or disordinate scarcity of clothing is reprovable. Also the sin of their ornament, or of apparel, as in things that appertain to riding, as in too many delicate horses, that be holden for delight, that be so fair, fat, and costly; and also in many a vicious knave,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5105" id="noteref-5105" epub:type="noteref">5105</a> that is sustained because of them; in curious harness, as in saddles, cruppers, peytrels,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5106" id="noteref-5106" epub:type="noteref">5106</a> and bridles, covered with precious cloth and rich bars and plates of gold and silver. For which God saith by Zechariah the prophet, “I will confound the riders of such horses.” These folk take little regard of the riding of God’s Son of heaven, and of his harness, when he rode upon an ass, and had no other harness but the poor clothes of his disciples; nor we read not that ever he rode on any other beast. I speak this for the sin of superfluity, and not for reasonable honesty,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5107" id="noteref-5107" epub:type="noteref">5107</a> when reason it requireth. And moreover, certes, pride is greatly notified in holding of great meinie,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5108" id="noteref-5108" epub:type="noteref">5108</a> when they be of little profit or of right no profit, and namely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5109" id="noteref-5109" epub:type="noteref">5109</a> when that meinie is felonous and damageous<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5110" id="noteref-5110" epub:type="noteref">5110</a> to the people by hardiness<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5111" id="noteref-5111" epub:type="noteref">5111</a> of high lordship, or by way of office; for certes, such lords sell then their lordship to the devil of hell, when they sustain the wickedness of their meinie. Or else, when these folk of low degree, as they that hold hostelries, sustain theft of their hostellers, and that is in many manner of deceits: that manner of folk be the flies that follow the honey, or else the hounds that follow the carrion. Such foresaid folk strangle spiritually their lordships; for which thus saith David the prophet, “Wicked death may come unto these lordships, and God give that they may descend into hell adown; for in their houses is iniquity and shrewedness,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5112" id="noteref-5112" epub:type="noteref">5112</a> and not God of heaven.” And certes, but if<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5113" id="noteref-5113" epub:type="noteref">5113</a> they do amendment, right as God gave his benison to Laban by the service of Jacob, and to Pharaoh by the service of Joseph; right so God will give his malison to such lordships as sustain the wickedness of their servants, but<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5114" id="noteref-5114" epub:type="noteref">5114</a> they come to amendment. Pride of the table apaireth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5115" id="noteref-5115" epub:type="noteref">5115</a> eke full oft; for, certes, rich men be called to feasts, and poor folk be put away and rebuked; also in excess of divers meats and drinks, and namely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5116" id="noteref-5116" epub:type="noteref">5116</a> such manner bake-meats and dish-meats burning of wild fire, and painted and castled with paper, and semblable<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5117" id="noteref-5117" epub:type="noteref">5117</a> waste, so that it is abuse to think. And eke in too great preciousness of vessel,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5118" id="noteref-5118" epub:type="noteref">5118</a> and curiosity of minstrelsy, by which a man is stirred more to the delights of luxury, if so be that he set his heart the less upon our Lord Jesus Christ, certain it is a sin; and certainly the delights might be so great in this case, that a man might lightly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5119" id="noteref-5119" epub:type="noteref">5119</a> fall by them into deadly sin.</p>
				<p>[The sins that arise of pride advisedly and habitually are deadly; those that arise by frailty unadvised suddenly, and suddenly withdraw again, though grievous, are not deadly. Pride itself springs sometimes of the goods of nature, sometimes of the goods of fortune, sometimes of the goods of grace; but the Parson, enumerating and examining all these in turn, points out how little security they possess and how little ground for pride they furnish, and goes on to enforce the remedy against pride⁠—which is humility or meekness, a virtue through which a man hath true knowledge of himself, and holdeth no high esteem of himself in regard of his deserts, considering ever his frailty.]</p>
				<p>Now be there three manners<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5120" id="noteref-5120" epub:type="noteref">5120</a> of humility; as humility in heart, and another in the mouth, and the third in works. The humility in the heart is in four manners: the one is, when a man holdeth himself as nought worth before God of heaven; the second is, when he despiseth no other man; the third is, when he recketh not though men hold him nought worth; the fourth is, when he is not sorry of his humiliation. Also the humility of mouth is in four things: in temperate speech; in humility of speech; and when he confesseth with his own mouth that he is such as he thinketh that he is in his heart; another is, when he praiseth the bounte<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5121" id="noteref-5121" epub:type="noteref">5121</a> of another man and nothing thereof diminisheth. Humility eke in works is in four manners: the first is, when he putteth other men before him; the second is, to choose the lowest place of all; the third is, gladly to assent to good counsel; the fourth is, to stand gladly by the award<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5122" id="noteref-5122" epub:type="noteref">5122</a> of his sovereign, or of him that is higher in degree: certain this is a great work of humility.</p>
				<p>[The Parson proceeds to treat of the other cardinal sins, and their remedies: (2.) Envy, with its remedy, the love of God principally and of our neighbours as ourselves: (3.) Anger, with all its fruits in revenge, rancour, hate, discord, manslaughter, blasphemy, swearing, falsehood, flattery, chiding and reproving, scorning, treachery, sowing of strife, doubleness of tongue, betraying of counsel to a man’s disgrace, menacing, idle words, jangling, japery or buffoonery, <abbr>etc.</abbr>⁠—and its remedy in the virtues called mansuetude, debonairté, or gentleness, and patience or sufferance: (4.) Sloth, or “Accidie,” which comes after the sin of Anger, because Envy blinds the eyes of a man, and Anger troubleth a man, and Sloth maketh him heavy, thoughtful, and peevish. It is opposed to every estate of man⁠—as unfallen, and held to work in praising and adoring God; as sinful, and held to labour in praying for deliverance from sin; and as in the state of grace, and held to works of penitence. It resembles the heavy and sluggish condition of those in hell; it will suffer no hardness and no penance; it prevents any beginning of good works; it causes despair of God’s mercy, which is the sin against the Holy Ghost; it induces somnolency and neglect of communion in prayer with God; and it breeds negligence or recklessness, that cares for nothing, and is the nurse of all mischiefs, if ignorance is their mother. Against Sloth, and these and other branches and fruits of it, the remedy lies in the virtue of fortitude or strength, in its various species of magnanimity or great courage; faith and hope in God and his saints; surety or sickerness, when a man fears nothing that can oppose the good works he has under taken; magnificence, when he carries out great works of goodness begun; constancy or stableness of heart; and other incentives to energy and laborious service: (5.) Avarice, or Covetousness, which is the root of all harms, since its votaries are idolaters, oppressors and enslavers of men, deceivers of their equals in business, simoniacs, gamblers, liars, thieves, false swearers, blasphemers, murderers, and sacrilegious. Its remedy lies in compassion and pity largely exercised, and in reasonable liberality⁠—for those who spend on “fool-largesse,” or ostentation of worldly estate and luxury, shall receive the malison that Christ shall give at the day of doom to them that shall be damned: (6.) Gluttony;⁠—of which the Parson treats so briefly that the chapter may be given in full:⁠—]</p>
				<p>After Avarice cometh Gluttony, which is express against the commandment of God. Gluttony is unmeasurable appetite to eat or to drink; or else to do in aught to the unmeasurable appetite and disordered covetousness<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5123" id="noteref-5123" epub:type="noteref">5123</a> to eat or drink. This sin corrupted all this world, as is well shewed in the sin of Adam and of Eve. Look also what saith Saint Paul of gluttony: “Many,” saith he, “go, of which I have oft said to you, and now I say it weeping, that they be enemies of the cross of Christ, of which the end is death, and of which their womb is their God and their glory;” in confusion of them that so savour<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5124" id="noteref-5124" epub:type="noteref">5124</a> earthly things. He that is usant<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5125" id="noteref-5125" epub:type="noteref">5125</a> to this sin of gluttony, he may no sin withstand, he must be in servage<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5126" id="noteref-5126" epub:type="noteref">5126</a> of all vices, for it is the devil’s hoard,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5127" id="noteref-5127" epub:type="noteref">5127</a> where he hideth him in and resteth. This sin hath many species. The first is drunkenness, that is the horrible sepulture of man’s reason: and therefore when a man is drunken, he hath lost his reason; and this is deadly sin. But soothly, when that a man is not wont to strong drink, and peradventure knoweth not the strength of the drink, or hath feebleness in his head, or hath travailed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5128" id="noteref-5128" epub:type="noteref">5128</a> through which he drinketh the more, all<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5129" id="noteref-5129" epub:type="noteref">5129</a> be he suddenly caught with drink, it is no deadly sin, but venial. The second species of gluttony is, that the spirit of a man waxeth all troubled for drunkenness, and bereaveth a man the discretion of his wit. The third species of gluttony is, when a man devoureth his meat, and hath no rightful manner of eating. The fourth is, when, through the great abundance of his meat, the humours of his body be distempered. The fifth is, forgetfulness by too much drinking, for which a man sometimes forgetteth by the morrow what be did at eve. In other manner be distinct the species of gluttony, after Saint Gregory. The first is, for to eat or drink before time. The second is, when a man getteth him too delicate meat or drink. The third is, when men take too much over measure.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5130" id="noteref-5130" epub:type="noteref">5130</a> The fourth is curiosity<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5131" id="noteref-5131" epub:type="noteref">5131</a> with great intent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5132" id="noteref-5132" epub:type="noteref">5132</a> to make and apparel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5133" id="noteref-5133" epub:type="noteref">5133</a> his meat. The fifth is, for to eat too greedily. These be the five fingers of the devil’s hand, by which he draweth folk to the sin.</p>
				<p>Against gluttony the remedy is abstinence, as saith Galen; but that I hold not meritorious, if he do it only for the health of his body. Saint Augustine will that abstinence be done for virtue, and with patience. Abstinence, saith he, is little worth, but<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5134" id="noteref-5134" epub:type="noteref">5134</a> if a man have good will thereto, and but it be enforced by patience and by charity, and that men do it for God’s sake, and in hope to have the bliss in heaven. The fellows of abstinence be temperance, that holdeth the mean in all things; also shame, that escheweth all dishonesty,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5135" id="noteref-5135" epub:type="noteref">5135</a> sufficiency, that seeketh no rich meats nor drinks, nor doth no force of<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5136" id="noteref-5136" epub:type="noteref">5136</a> no outrageous apparelling of meat; measure<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5137" id="noteref-5137" epub:type="noteref">5137</a> also, that restraineth by reason the unmeasurable appetite of eating; soberness also, that restraineth the outrage of drink; sparing also, that restraineth the delicate ease to sit long at meat, wherefore some folk stand of their own will to eat, because they will eat at less leisure.</p>
				<p>[At great length the Parson then points out the many varieties of the sin of (7.) Lechery, and its remedy in chastity and continence, alike in marriage and in widowhood; also in the abstaining from all such indulgences of eating, drinking, and sleeping as inflame the passions, and from the company of all who may tempt to the sin. Minute guidance is given as to the duty of confessing fully and faithfully the circumstances that attend and may aggravate this sin; and the Treatise then passes to the consideration of the conditions that are essential to a true and profitable confession of sin in general. First, it must be in sorrowful bitterness of spirit; a condition that has five signs⁠—shamefastness, humility in heart and outward sign, weeping with the bodily eyes or in the heart, disregard of the shame that might curtail or garble confession, and obedience to the penance enjoined. Secondly, true confession must be promptly made, for dread of death, of increase of sinfulness, of forgetfulness of what should be confessed, of Christ’s refusal to hear if it be put off to the last day of life; and this condition has four terms; that confession be well pondered beforehand, that the man confessing have comprehended in his mind the number and greatness of his sins and how long he has lain in sin, that he be contrite for and eschew his sins, and that he fear and flee the occasions for that sin to which he is inclined.⁠—What follows under this head is of some interest for the light which it throws on the rigorous government wielded by the Romish Church in those days⁠—]</p>
				<p>Also thou shalt shrive thee of all thy sins to one man, and not a parcel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5138" id="noteref-5138" epub:type="noteref">5138</a> to one man, and a parcel to another; that is to understand, in intent to depart<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5139" id="noteref-5139" epub:type="noteref">5139</a> thy confession for shame or dread; for it is but strangling of thy soul. For certes Jesus Christ is entirely all good, in him is none imperfection, and therefore either he forgiveth all perfectly, or else never a deal.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5140" id="noteref-5140" epub:type="noteref">5140</a> I say not that if thou be assigned to thy penitencer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5141" id="noteref-5141" epub:type="noteref">5141</a> for a certain sin, that thou art bound to shew him all the remnant of thy sins, of which thou hast been shriven of thy curate, but if it like thee<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5142" id="noteref-5142" epub:type="noteref">5142</a> of thy humility; this is no departing<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5143" id="noteref-5143" epub:type="noteref">5143</a> of shrift. And I say not, where I speak of division of confession, that if thou have license to shrive thee to a discreet and an honest priest, and where thee liketh, and by the license of thy curate, that thou mayest not well shrive thee to him of all thy sins: but let no blot be behind, let no sin be untold as far as thou hast remembrance. And when thou shalt be shriven of thy curate, tell him eke all the sins that thou hast done since thou wert last shriven. This is no wicked intent of division of shrift. Also, very shrift<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5144" id="noteref-5144" epub:type="noteref">5144</a> asketh certain conditions. First, that thou shrive thee by thy free will, not constrained, nor for shame of folk, nor for malady,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5145" id="noteref-5145" epub:type="noteref">5145</a> or such things: for it is reason, that he that trespasseth by his free will, that by his free will he confess his trespass; and that no other man tell his sin but himself; nor he shall not nay nor deny his sin, nor wrath him against the priest for admonishing him to leave his sin. The second condition is, that thy shrift be lawful, that is to say, that thou that shrivest thee, and eke the priest that heareth thy confession, be verily in the faith of Holy Church, and that a man be not despaired of the mercy of Jesus Christ, as Cain and Judas were. And eke a man must accuse himself of his own trespass, and not another: but he shall blame and wite<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5146" id="noteref-5146" epub:type="noteref">5146</a> himself of his own malice and of his sin, and none other: but nevertheless, if that another man be occasion or else enticer of his sin, or the estate of the person be such by which his sin is aggravated, or else that be may not plainly shrive him but<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5147" id="noteref-5147" epub:type="noteref">5147</a> he tell the person with which he hath sinned, then may he tell, so that his intent be not to backbite the person, but only to declare his confession. Thou shalt not eke make no leasings<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5148" id="noteref-5148" epub:type="noteref">5148</a> in thy confession for humility, peradventure, to say that thou hast committed and done such sins of which that thou wert never guilty. For Saint Augustine saith, “If that thou, because of humility, makest a leasing on thyself, though thou were not in sin before, yet art thou then in sin through thy leasing.” Thou must also shew thy sin by thine own proper mouth, but<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5149" id="noteref-5149" epub:type="noteref">5149</a> thou be dumb, and not by letter; for thou that hast done the sin, thou shalt have the shame of the confession. Thou shalt not paint thy confession with fair and subtle words, to cover the more thy sin; for then beguilest thou thyself, and not the priest; thou must tell it plainly, be it never so foul nor so horrible. Thou shalt eke shrive thee to a priest that is discreet to counsel thee; and eke thou shalt not shrive thee for vainglory, nor for hypocrisy, nor for no cause but only for the doubt<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5150" id="noteref-5150" epub:type="noteref">5150</a> of Jesus’ Christ and the health of thy soul. Thou shalt not run to the priest all suddenly, to tell him lightly thy sin, as who telleth a jape<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5151" id="noteref-5151" epub:type="noteref">5151</a> or a tale, but advisedly and with good devotion; and generally shrive thee oft; if thou oft fall, oft arise by confession. And though thou shrive thee oftener than once of sin of which thou hast been shriven, it is more merit; and, as saith Saint Augustine, thou shalt have the more lightly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5152" id="noteref-5152" epub:type="noteref">5152</a> release and grace of God, both of sin and of pain. And certes, once a year at the least way, it is lawful to be houseled,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5153" id="noteref-5153" epub:type="noteref">5153</a> for soothly once a year all things in the earth renovelen.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5154" id="noteref-5154" epub:type="noteref">5154</a></p>
				<p>[Here ends the Second Part of the Treatise; the Third Part, which contains the practical application of the whole, follows entire, along with the remarkable “Prayer of Chaucer,” as it stands in the Harleian Manuscript:⁠—]</p>
				<section id="de-tertia-parte-poenitentioe" epub:type="part">
					<h4 epub:type="title" xml:lang="la">De Tertia Parte Poenitentioe</h4>
					<p>Now have I told you of very<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5155" id="noteref-5155" epub:type="noteref">5155</a> confession, that is the second part of penitence: The third part of penitence is satisfaction, and that standeth generally in almsdeed and bodily pain. Now be there three manner of almsdeed: contrition of heart, where a man offereth himself to God; the second is, to have pity of the default of his neighbour; the third is, in giving of good counsel and comfort, ghostly and bodily, where men have need, and namely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5156" id="noteref-5156" epub:type="noteref">5156</a> in sustenance of man’s food. And take keep<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5157" id="noteref-5157" epub:type="noteref">5157</a> that a man hath need of these things generally; he hath need of food, of clothing, and of herberow,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5158" id="noteref-5158" epub:type="noteref">5158</a> he hath need of charitable counsel and visiting in prison and malady, and sepulture of his dead body. And if thou mayest not visit the needful with thy person, visit them by thy message and by thy gifts. These be generally alms or works of charity of them that have temporal riches or discretion in counselling. Of these works shalt thou hear at the day of doom. This alms shouldest thou do of thine own proper things, and hastily,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5159" id="noteref-5159" epub:type="noteref">5159</a> and privily if thou mayest; but nevertheless, if thou mayest not do it privily, thou shalt not forbear to do alms, though men see it, so that it be not done for thank of the world, but only for thank of Jesus Christ. For, as witnesseth Saint Matthew, <abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>, “A city may not be hid that is set on a mountain, nor men light not a lantern and put it under a bushel, but men set it on a candlestick, to light the men in the house; right so shall your light lighten before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father that is in heaven.”</p>
					<p>Now as to speak of bodily pain, it is in prayer, in wakings,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5160" id="noteref-5160" epub:type="noteref">5160</a> in fastings, and in virtuous teachings. Of orisons ye shall understand, that orisons or prayers is to say a piteous will of heart, that redresseth it in God, and expresseth it by word outward, to remove harms, and to have things spiritual and durable, and sometimes temporal things. Of which orisons, certes in the orison of the Pater noster hath our Lord Jesus Christ enclosed most things. Certes, it is privileged of three things in its dignity, for which it is more digne<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5161" id="noteref-5161" epub:type="noteref">5161</a> than any other prayer: for Jesus Christ himself made it: and it is short, for<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5162" id="noteref-5162" epub:type="noteref">5162</a> it should be coude the more lightly,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5163" id="noteref-5163" epub:type="noteref">5163</a> and to withhold<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5164" id="noteref-5164" epub:type="noteref">5164</a> it the more easy in heart, and help himself the oftener with this orison; and for a man should be the less weary to say it; and for a man may not excuse him to learn it, it is so short and so easy: and for it comprehendeth in itself all good prayers. The exposition of this holy prayer, that is so excellent and so digne, I betake<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5165" id="noteref-5165" epub:type="noteref">5165</a> to these masters of theology; save thus much will I say, when thou prayest that God should forgive thee thy guilts, as thou forgivest them that they guilt to thee, be full well ware that thou be not out of charity. This holy orison aminisheth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5166" id="noteref-5166" epub:type="noteref">5166</a> eke venial sin, and therefore it appertaineth specially to penitence. This prayer must be truly said, and in very faith, and that men pray to God ordinately, discreetly, and devoutly; and always a man shall put his will to be subject to the will of God. This orison must eke be said with great humbleness and full pure, and honestly, and not to the annoyance of any man or woman. It must eke be continued with the works of charity. It availeth against the vices of the soul; for, assaith Saint Jerome, by fasting be saved the vices of the flesh, and by prayer the vices of the soul.</p>
					<p>After this thou shalt understand, that bodily pain stands in waking.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5167" id="noteref-5167" epub:type="noteref">5167</a> For Jesus Christ saith “Wake and pray, that ye enter not into temptation.” Ye shall understand also, that fasting stands in three things: in forbearing of bodily meat and drink, and in forbearing of worldly jollity, and in forbearing of deadly sin; this is to say, that a man shall keep him from deadly sin in all that he may. And thou shalt understand eke, that God ordained fasting; and to fasting appertain four things: largeness<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5168" id="noteref-5168" epub:type="noteref">5168</a> to poor folk; gladness of heart spiritual; not to be angry nor annoyed nor grudge<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5169" id="noteref-5169" epub:type="noteref">5169</a> for he fasteth; and also reasonable hour for to eat by measure; that is to say, a man should not eat in untime,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5170" id="noteref-5170" epub:type="noteref">5170</a> nor sit the longer at his meal for<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5171" id="noteref-5171" epub:type="noteref">5171</a> he fasteth. Then shalt thou understand, that bodily pain standeth in discipline, or teaching, by word, or by writing, or by ensample. Also in wearing of hairs<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5172" id="noteref-5172" epub:type="noteref">5172</a> or of stamin,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5173" id="noteref-5173" epub:type="noteref">5173</a> or of habergeons<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5174" id="noteref-5174" epub:type="noteref">5174</a> on their naked flesh for Christ’s sake; but ware thee well that such manner penance of thy flesh make not thine heart bitter or angry, nor annoyed of thyself; for better is to cast away thine hair than to cast away the sweetness of our Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore saith Saint Paul, “Clothe you, as they that be chosen of God in heart, of misericorde,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5175" id="noteref-5175" epub:type="noteref">5175</a> debonairte,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5176" id="noteref-5176" epub:type="noteref">5176</a> sufferance,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5177" id="noteref-5177" epub:type="noteref">5177</a> and such manner of clothing,” of which Jesus Christ is more apaid<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5178" id="noteref-5178" epub:type="noteref">5178</a> than of hairs or of hauberks. Then is discipline eke in knocking of thy breast, in scourging with yards,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5179" id="noteref-5179" epub:type="noteref">5179</a> in kneelings, in tribulations, in suffering patiently wrongs that be done to him, and eke in patient sufferance of maladies, or losing of worldly catel,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5180" id="noteref-5180" epub:type="noteref">5180</a> or of wife, or of child, or of other friends.</p>
					<p>Then shalt thou understand which things disturb penance, and this is in four things; that is dread, shame, hope, and wanhope, that is, desperation. And for to speak first of dread, for which he weeneth that he may suffer no penance, thereagainst is remedy for to think that bodily penance is but short and little at the regard of<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5181" id="noteref-5181" epub:type="noteref">5181</a> the pain of hell, that is so cruel and so long, that it lasteth without end. Now against the shame that a man hath to shrive him, and namely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5182" id="noteref-5182" epub:type="noteref">5182</a> these hypocrites, that would be holden so perfect, that they have no need to shrive them; against that shame should a man think, that by way of reason he that hath not been ashamed to do foul things, certes he ought not to be ashamed to do fair things, and that is confession. A man should eke think, that God seeth and knoweth all thy thoughts, and all thy works; to him may nothing be hid nor covered. Men should eke remember them of the shame that is to come at the day of doom, to them that be not penitent and shriven in this present life; for all the creatures in heaven, and in earth, and in hell, shall see apertly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5183" id="noteref-5183" epub:type="noteref">5183</a> all that he hideth in this world.</p>
					<p>Now for to speak of them that be so negligent and slow to shrive them; that stands in two manners. The one is, that he hopeth to live long, and to purchase<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5184" id="noteref-5184" epub:type="noteref">5184</a> much riches for his delight, and then he will shrive him: and, as he sayeth, he may, as him seemeth, timely enough come to shrift: another is, the surquedrie<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5185" id="noteref-5185" epub:type="noteref">5185</a> that he hath in Christ’s mercy. Against the first vice, he shall think that our life is in no sickerness,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5186" id="noteref-5186" epub:type="noteref">5186</a> and eke that all the riches in this world be in adventure, and pass as a shadow on the wall; and, as saith <abbr>St.</abbr> Gregory, that it appertaineth to the great righteousness of God, that never shall the pain stint<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5187" id="noteref-5187" epub:type="noteref">5187</a> of them, that never would withdraw them from sin, their thanks,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5188" id="noteref-5188" epub:type="noteref">5188</a> but aye continue in sin; for that perpetual will to do sin shall they have perpetual pain. Wanhope<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5189" id="noteref-5189" epub:type="noteref">5189</a> is in two manners.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5190" id="noteref-5190" epub:type="noteref">5190</a> The first wanhope is, in the mercy of God: the other is, that they think they might not long persevere in goodness. The first wanhope cometh of that he deemeth that he sinned so highly and so oft, and so long hath lain in sin, that he shall not be saved. Certes against that cursed wanhope should he think, that the passion of Jesus Christ is more strong for to unbind, than sin is strong for to bind. Against the second wanhope he shall think, that as oft as he falleth, he may arise again by penitence; and though he never so long hath lain in sin, the mercy of Christ is always ready to receive him to mercy. Against the wanhope that he thinketh he should not long persevere in goodness, he shall think that the feebleness of the devil may nothing do, but<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5191" id="noteref-5191" epub:type="noteref">5191</a> men will suffer him; and eke he shall have strength of the help of God, and of all Holy Church, and of the protection of angels, if him list.</p>
					<p>Then shall men understand, what is the fruit of penance; and after the word of Jesus Christ, it is the endless bliss of heaven, where joy hath no contrariety of woe nor of penance nor grievance; there all harms be passed of this present life; there as is the sickerness from the pain of hell; there as is the blissful company, that rejoice them evermore each of the other’s joy; there as the body of man, that whilom was foul and dark, is more clear than the sun; there as the body of man that whilom was sick and frail, feeble and mortal, is immortal, and so strong and so whole, that there may nothing apair<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5192" id="noteref-5192" epub:type="noteref">5192</a> it; there is neither hunger, nor thirst, nor cold, but every soul replenished with the sight of the perfect knowing of God. This blissful regne<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5193" id="noteref-5193" epub:type="noteref">5193</a> may men purchase by poverty spiritual, and the glory by lowliness, the plenty of joy by hunger and thirst, the rest by travail, and the life by death and mortification of sin; to which life He us bring, that bought us with his precious blood! Amen.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="preces-de-chauceres" epub:type="part">
					<h4 epub:type="title" xml:lang="fr">Preces de Chauceres<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5194" id="noteref-5194" epub:type="noteref">5194</a></h4>
					<p>Now pray I to you all that hear this little treatise or read it, that if there be anything in it that likes them, that thereof they thank our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom proceedeth all wit and all goodness; and if there be anything that displeaseth them, I pray them also that they arette<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5195" id="noteref-5195" epub:type="noteref">5195</a> it to the default of mine unconning,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5196" id="noteref-5196" epub:type="noteref">5196</a> and not to my will, that would fain have said better if I had had conning; for the book saith, all that is written for our doctrine is written. Wherefore I beseech you meekly for the mercy of God that ye pray for me, that God have mercy on me and forgive me my guilts, and namely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5197" id="noteref-5197" epub:type="noteref">5197</a> my translations and of inditing in worldly vanities, which I revoke in my Retractions, as is the Book of Troilus, the Book also of Fame, the Book of Twenty-five Ladies, the Book of the Duchess, the Book of Saint Valentine’s Day and of the Parliament of Birds, the Tales of Canterbury, all those that sounen unto sin,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5198" id="noteref-5198" epub:type="noteref">5198</a> the Book of the Lion, and many other books, if they were in my mind or remembrance, and many a song and many a lecherous lay, of the which Christ for his great mercy forgive me the sins. But of the translation of Boece <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De Consolatione</i>, and other books of consolation and of legend of lives of saints, and homilies, and moralities, and devotion, that thank I our Lord Jesus Christ, and his mother, and all the saints in heaven, beseeching them that they from henceforth unto my life’s end send me grace to bewail my guilts, and to study to the salvation of my soul, and grant me grace and space of very<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5199" id="noteref-5199" epub:type="noteref">5199</a> repentance, penitence, confession, and satisfaction, to do in this present life, through the benign grace of Him that is King of kings and Priest of all priests, that bought us with his precious blood of his heart, so that I may be one of them at the day of doom that shall be saved: <i xml:lang="la">Qui cum Patre et Spiritu Sancto vivis et regnas Deus per omnia secula.</i> Amen.</p>
				</section>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
