<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Shipman’s Tale</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-shipmans-tale" epub:type="division z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Shipman’s Tale<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3675" id="noteref-3675" epub:type="noteref">3675</a></h2>
			<section id="the-shipmans-tale-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Prologue</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Our Host upon his stirrups stood anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saidë; “Good men, hearken every one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This was a thrifty<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3676" id="noteref-3676" epub:type="noteref">3676</a> talë for the nones.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sir Parish Priest,” quoth he, “for Goddë’s bones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell us a tale, as was thy forword yore:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3677" id="noteref-3677" epub:type="noteref">3677</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I see well that ye learned men in lore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3678" id="noteref-3678" epub:type="noteref">3678</a> muchë good, by Goddë’s dignity.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Parson him answér’d, “<i xml:lang="la">Ben’dicite!</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>What ails the man, so sinfully to swear?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our Host answér’d, “O Jankin, be ye there?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, good men,” quoth our Host, “hearken to me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I smell a Lollard<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3679" id="noteref-3679" epub:type="noteref">3679</a> in the wind,” quoth he.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Abide, for Goddë’s dignë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3680" id="noteref-3680" epub:type="noteref">3680</a> passión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For we shall have a predicatión:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Lollard here will preachen us somewhat.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nay, by my father’s soul, that shall he not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saidë the Shipman; “Here shall he not preach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shall no gospel glosë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3681" id="noteref-3681" epub:type="noteref">3681</a> here nor teach.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We all believe in the great God,” quoth he.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“He wouldë sowë some difficultý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or springë cockle<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3682" id="noteref-3682" epub:type="noteref">3682</a> in our cleanë corn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore, Host, I warnë thee beforn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My jolly body shall a talë tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I shall clinkë you so merry a bell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I shall waken all this company;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But it shall not be of philosophy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor of physíc, nor termës quaint of law;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is but little Latin in my maw.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3683" id="noteref-3683" epub:type="noteref">3683</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-shipmans-tale-main" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Tale</h3>
				<p>
					<span>A Merchant whilom dwell’d at Saint Deníse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That richë was, for which men held him wise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wife he had of excellent beautý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And companiable and revellous<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3684" id="noteref-3684" epub:type="noteref">3684</a> was she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which is a thing that causeth more dispence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than worth is all the cheer and reverence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That men them do at feastës and at dances.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such salutatións and countenánces</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Passen, as doth the shadow on the wall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Put woe is him that payë must for all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3685" id="noteref-3685" epub:type="noteref">3685</a> husband algate<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3686" id="noteref-3686" epub:type="noteref">3686</a> he must pay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He must us<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3687" id="noteref-3687" epub:type="noteref">3687</a> clothe and he must us array</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All for his owen worship richëly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which array we dancë jollily.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if that he may not, paráventure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ellës list not such dispence endure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thinketh it is wasted and y-lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then must another payë for our cost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or lend us gold, and that is perilous.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This noble merchant held a noble house;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which he had all day so great repair,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3688" id="noteref-3688" epub:type="noteref">3688</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For his largesse, and for his wife was fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That wonder is; but hearken to my tale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amongës all these guestës great and smale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was a monk, a fair man and a bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I trow a thirty winter he was old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ever-in-one<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3689" id="noteref-3689" epub:type="noteref">3689</a> was drawing to that place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This youngë monk, that was so fair of face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Acquainted was so with this goodë man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since that their firstë knowledgë began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in his house as familiár was he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As it is possible any friend to be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, for as muchel as this goodë man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke this monk of which that I began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were both the two y-born in one villáge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The monk him claimed, as for cousinage,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3690" id="noteref-3690" epub:type="noteref">3690</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he again him said not oncë nay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But was as glad thereof as fowl of day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For to his heart it was a great pleasánce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus be they knit with etern’ alliánce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And each of them gan other to assure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of brotherhood while that their life may dure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Free was Dan<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3691" id="noteref-3691" epub:type="noteref">3691</a> John, and namely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3692" id="noteref-3692" epub:type="noteref">3692</a> of dispence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in that house, and full of diligence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To do pleasánce, and also great costáge;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3693" id="noteref-3693" epub:type="noteref">3693</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He not forgot to give the leastë page</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all that house; but, after their degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He gave the lord, and sithen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3694" id="noteref-3694" epub:type="noteref">3694</a> his meinie,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3695" id="noteref-3695" epub:type="noteref">3695</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that he came, some manner honest thing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which they were as glad of his comíng</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As fowl is fain when that the sun upriseth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more of this as now, for it sufficeth.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But so befell, this merchant on a day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shope<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3696" id="noteref-3696" epub:type="noteref">3696</a> him to makë ready his array</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toward the town of Bruges for to fare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To buyë there a portión of ware;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3697" id="noteref-3697" epub:type="noteref">3697</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which he hath to Paris sent anon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A messenger, and prayed hath Dan John</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he should come to Saint Denís, and play<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3698" id="noteref-3698" epub:type="noteref">3698</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>With him, and with his wife, a day or tway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere he to Bruges went, in allë wise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This noble monk, of which I you devise,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3699" id="noteref-3699" epub:type="noteref">3699</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had of his abbot, as him list, licence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Because he was a man of high prudence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke an officer out for to ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see their granges and their barnës wide);<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3700" id="noteref-3700" epub:type="noteref">3700</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And unto Saint Denis he came anon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who was so welcome as my lord Dan John,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our dearë cousin, full of courtesy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With him he brought a jub<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3701" id="noteref-3701" epub:type="noteref">3701</a> of malvesie,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3702" id="noteref-3702" epub:type="noteref">3702</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke another full of fine vernage,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3703" id="noteref-3703" epub:type="noteref">3703</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And volatile,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3704" id="noteref-3704" epub:type="noteref">3704</a> as aye was his uságe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus I let them eat, and drink, and play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This merchant and this monk, a day or tway.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The thirdë day the merchant up ariseth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on his needës sadly him adviseth;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3705" id="noteref-3705" epub:type="noteref">3705</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And up into his countour-house<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3706" id="noteref-3706" epub:type="noteref">3706</a> went he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To reckon with himself as well may be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3707" id="noteref-3707" epub:type="noteref">3707</a> year, how that it with him stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how that he dispended bad his good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if that he increased were or non.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His bookës and his baggës many a one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He laid before him on his counting-board.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full richë was his treasure and his hoard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which full fast his countour door he shet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke he would that no man should him let<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3708" id="noteref-3708" epub:type="noteref">3708</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his accountës, for the meanë time:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus he sat, till it was passed prime.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Dan John was risen in the morn also,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the garden walked to and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And had his thingës said full courteously.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The good wife came walking full privily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the garden, where he walked soft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And him saluted, as she had done oft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A maiden child came in her companý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which as her list she might govérn and gie,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3709" id="noteref-3709" epub:type="noteref">3709</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For yet under the yardë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3710" id="noteref-3710" epub:type="noteref">3710</a> was the maid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O dearë cousin mine, Dan John,” she said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What aileth you so rath<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3711" id="noteref-3711" epub:type="noteref">3711</a> for to arise?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Niecë,” quoth he, “it ought enough suffice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Five hourës for to sleep upon a night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3712" id="noteref-3712" epub:type="noteref">3712</a> it were for an old appalled<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3713" id="noteref-3713" epub:type="noteref">3713</a> wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As be these wedded men, that lie and dare,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3714" id="noteref-3714" epub:type="noteref">3714</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As in a formë sits a weary hare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Allë forstraught<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3715" id="noteref-3715" epub:type="noteref">3715</a> with houndës great and smale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, dearë niecë, why be ye so pale?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I trowë certes that our goodë man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath you so laboúred, since this night began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That you were need to restë hastily.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with that word he laugh’d full merrily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of his owen thought he wax’d all red.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This fairë wife gan for to shake her head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saidë thus; “Yea, God wot all,” quoth she.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nay, cousin mine, it stands not so with me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For by that God, that gave me soul and life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all the realm of France is there no wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That lessë lust hath to that sorry play;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I may sing alas and well-away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I was born; but to no wight,” quoth she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Dare I not tell how that it stands with me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore I think out of this land to wend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ellës of myself to make an end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So full am I of dread and eke of care.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This monk began upon this wife to stare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said, “Alas! my niecë, God forbid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ye for any sorrow, or any dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fordo<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3716" id="noteref-3716" epub:type="noteref">3716</a> yourself: but tellë me your grief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Paráventure I may, in your mischíef,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3717" id="noteref-3717" epub:type="noteref">3717</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Counsel or help; and therefore tellë me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All your annoy, for it shall be secré.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For on my portos<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3718" id="noteref-3718" epub:type="noteref">3718</a> here I make an oath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That never in my life, for lief nor loth,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3719" id="noteref-3719" epub:type="noteref">3719</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne shall I of no counsel you bewray.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“The same again to you,” quoth she, “I say.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By God and by this portos I you swear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though men me woulden all in pieces tear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne shall I never, for<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3720" id="noteref-3720" epub:type="noteref">3720</a> to go to hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bewray one word of thing that ye me tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For no cousinage, nor alliánce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But verily for love and affiánce.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3721" id="noteref-3721" epub:type="noteref">3721</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus be they sworn, and thereupon they kiss’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And each of them told other what them list.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Cousin,” quoth she, “if that I haddë space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I have none, and namely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3722" id="noteref-3722" epub:type="noteref">3722</a> in this place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then would I tell a legend of my life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What I have suffer’d since I was a wife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With mine husbánd, all<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3723" id="noteref-3723" epub:type="noteref">3723</a> be he your cousín.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nay,” quoth this monk, “by God and Saint Martín,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is no morë cousin unto me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than is the leaf that hangeth on the tree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I call him so, by Saint Denis of France,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To have the morë cause of ácquaintánce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of you, which I have loved specially</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aboven allë women sickerly,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3724" id="noteref-3724" epub:type="noteref">3724</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>This swear I you on my professioún;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3725" id="noteref-3725" epub:type="noteref">3725</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell me your grief, lest that he come adown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hasten you, and go away anon.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“My dearë love,” quoth she, “O my Dan John,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full lief<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3726" id="noteref-3726" epub:type="noteref">3726</a> were me this counsel for to hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But out it must, I may no more abide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My husband is to me the worstë man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ever was since that the world began;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But since I am a wife, it sits<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3727" id="noteref-3727" epub:type="noteref">3727</a> not me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tellë no wight of our privity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Neither in bed, nor in none other place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God shield<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3728" id="noteref-3728" epub:type="noteref">3728</a> I shouldë tell it for his grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wifë shall not say of her husbánd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all honoúr, as I can understand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save unto you thus much I tellë shall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As help me God, he is nought worth at all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In no degree, the value of a fly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But yet me grieveth most his niggardý.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3729" id="noteref-3729" epub:type="noteref">3729</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And well ye wot, that women naturally</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Desire thingës six, as well as I.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They wouldë that their husbands shouldë be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hardy,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3730" id="noteref-3730" epub:type="noteref">3730</a> and wise, and rich, and thereto free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And buxom<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3731" id="noteref-3731" epub:type="noteref">3731</a> to his wife, and fresh in bed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, by that ilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3732" id="noteref-3732" epub:type="noteref">3732</a> Lord that for us bled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For his honoúr myself for to array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Sunday next I mustë needës pay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hundred francs, or ellës am I lorn.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3733" id="noteref-3733" epub:type="noteref">3733</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet were me lever<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3734" id="noteref-3734" epub:type="noteref">3734</a> that I were unborn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than me were done slander or villainý.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if mine husband eke might it espy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I were but lost; and therefore I you pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lend me this sum, or ellës must I dey.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3735" id="noteref-3735" epub:type="noteref">3735</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dan John, I say, lend me these hundred francs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pardie, I will not failë you, my thanks,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3736" id="noteref-3736" epub:type="noteref">3736</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that you list to do that I you pray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For at a certain day I will you pay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And do to you what pleasance and servíce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I may do, right as you list devise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And but<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3737" id="noteref-3737" epub:type="noteref">3737</a> I do, God take on me vengeánce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As foul as e’er had Ganilion<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3738" id="noteref-3738" epub:type="noteref">3738</a> of France.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This gentle monk answér’d in this mannére;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now truëly, mine owen lady dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have,” quoth he, “on you so greatë ruth,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3739" id="noteref-3739" epub:type="noteref">3739</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I you swear, and plightë you my truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That when your husband is to Flanders fare,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3740" id="noteref-3740" epub:type="noteref">3740</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will deliver you out of this care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I will bringë you a hundred francs.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with that word he caught her by the flanks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her embraced hard, and kissed her oft.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Go now your way,” quoth he, “all still and soft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let us dine as soon as that ye may,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For by my calinder ’tis prime of day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go now, and be as true as I shall be.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now ellës God forbiddë, Sir,” quoth she;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And forth she went, as jolly as a pie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bade the cookës that they should them hie,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3741" id="noteref-3741" epub:type="noteref">3741</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that men mightë dine, and that anon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up to her husband is this wifë gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And knocked at his contour boldëly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“<i xml:lang="fr">Qui est la?</i>”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3742" id="noteref-3742" epub:type="noteref">3742</a> quoth he. “Peter! it am I,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quoth she; “What, Sir, how longë all will ye fast?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How longë time will ye reckon and cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your summës, and your bookës, and your things?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The devil have part of all such reckonings!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye have enough, pardie, of Goddë’s sond.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3743" id="noteref-3743" epub:type="noteref">3743</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come down to-day, and let your baggës stond.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne be ye not ashamed, that Dan John</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall fasting all this day elengë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3744" id="noteref-3744" epub:type="noteref">3744</a> gon?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What? let us hear a mass, and go we dine.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Wife,” quoth this man, “little canst thou divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The curious businessë that we have;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For of us chapmen, all so God me save,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by that lord that cleped is Saint Ive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scarcely amongës twenty, ten shall thrive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Continually, lasting unto our age.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We may well makë cheer and good viságe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drivë forth the world as it may be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And keepen our estate in privity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till we be dead, or ellës that we play</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pilgrimage, or go out of the way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore have I great necessity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon this quaint<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3745" id="noteref-3745" epub:type="noteref">3745</a> world to advisë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3746" id="noteref-3746" epub:type="noteref">3746</a> me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For evermorë must we stand in dread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of hap and fortune in our chapmanhead.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3747" id="noteref-3747" epub:type="noteref">3747</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Flanders will I go to-morrow at day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And come again as soon as e’er I may:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which, my dearë wife, I thee beseek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As be to every wight buxom<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3748" id="noteref-3748" epub:type="noteref">3748</a> and meek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for to keep our good be curious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And honestly governë well our house.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast enough, in every manner wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That to a thrifty household may suffice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee lacketh none array, nor no vitail;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of silver in thy purse thou shalt not fail.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And with that word his contour door he shet,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3749" id="noteref-3749" epub:type="noteref">3749</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And down he went; no longer would he let;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3750" id="noteref-3750" epub:type="noteref">3750</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hastily a mass was therë said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And speedily the tables werë laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the dinner fastë they them sped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And richëly this monk the chapman fed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after dinner Dan John soberly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This chapman took apart, and privily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said him thus: “Cousin, it standeth so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, well I see, to Bruges ye will go;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God and Saint Austin speedë you and guide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray you, cousin, wisely that ye ride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Governë you also of your diét</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attemperly,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3751" id="noteref-3751" epub:type="noteref">3751</a> and namely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3752" id="noteref-3752" epub:type="noteref">3752</a> in this heat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betwixt us two needeth no strangë fare;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3753" id="noteref-3753" epub:type="noteref">3753</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Farewell, cousín, God shieldë you from care.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If any thing there be, by day or night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If it lie in my power and my might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ye me will command in any wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It shall be done, right as ye will devise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But one thing ere ye go, if it may be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wouldë pray you for to lend to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hundred frankës, for a week or twy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For certain beastës that I mustë buy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To storë with<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3754" id="noteref-3754" epub:type="noteref">3754</a> a placë that is ours</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(God help me so, I would that it were yours);</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall not failë surely of my day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not for a thousand francs, a milë way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But let this thing be secret, I you pray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For yet tonight these beastës must I buy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fare now well, mine owen cousin dear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i xml:lang="fr">Grand mercy</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3755" id="noteref-3755" epub:type="noteref">3755</a> of your cost and of your cheer.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This noble merchant gentilly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3756" id="noteref-3756" epub:type="noteref">3756</a> anon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Answér’d and said, “O cousin mine, Dan John,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now sickerly this is a small request:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My gold is yourës, when that it you lest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not only my gold, but my chaffare;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3757" id="noteref-3757" epub:type="noteref">3757</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take what you list, God shieldë that ye spare.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3758" id="noteref-3758" epub:type="noteref">3758</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But one thing is, ye know it well enow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of chapmen, that their money is their plough.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We may creancë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3759" id="noteref-3759" epub:type="noteref">3759</a> while we have a name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But goldless for to be it is no game.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pay it again when it lies in your ease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After my might full fain would I you please.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>These hundred frankës set he forth anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And privily he took them to Dan John;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No wight in all this world wist of this loan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saving the merchant and Dan John alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They drink, and speak, and roam a while, and play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till that Dan John rode unto his abbay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The morrow came, and forth this merchant rideth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Flanders-ward, his prentice well him guideth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till he came unto Bruges merrily.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now went this merchant fast and busily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About his need, and buyed and creanced;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He neither played at the dice, nor danced;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as a merchant, shortly for to tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He led his life; and there I let him dwell.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Sunday next<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3760" id="noteref-3760" epub:type="noteref">3760</a> the merchant was y-gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Saint Denís y-comen is Dan John,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With crown and beard all fresh and newly shave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all the house was not so little a knave,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3761" id="noteref-3761" epub:type="noteref">3761</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor no wight ellës that was not full fain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that my lord Dan John was come again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shortly to the point right for to gon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fairë wife accorded with Dan John,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That for these hundred francs he should all night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Havë her in his armës bolt upright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this accord performed was in deed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In mirth all night a busy life they lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till it was day, that Dan John went his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bade the meinie<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3762" id="noteref-3762" epub:type="noteref">3762</a> “Farewell; have good day.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For none of them, nor no wight in the town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had of Dan John right no suspicioún;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And forth he rodë home to his abbay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or where him list; no more of him I say.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The merchant, when that ended was the fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Saint Denís he gan for to repair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with his wife he madë feast and cheer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And toldë her that chaffare<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3763" id="noteref-3763" epub:type="noteref">3763</a> was so dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That needës must he make a chevisance;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3764" id="noteref-3764" epub:type="noteref">3764</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he was bound in a recognisance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To payë twenty thousand shields<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3765" id="noteref-3765" epub:type="noteref">3765</a> anon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which this merchant is to Paris gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To borrow of certain friendës that he had</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A certain francs, and some with him he lad.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3766" id="noteref-3766" epub:type="noteref">3766</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when that he was come into the town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For great cherté<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3767" id="noteref-3767" epub:type="noteref">3767</a> and great affectioún</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto Dan John he wentë first to play;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not for to borrow of him no monéy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bat for to weet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3768" id="noteref-3768" epub:type="noteref">3768</a> and see of his welfare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for to tellë him of his chaffare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As friendës do, when they be met in fere.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3769" id="noteref-3769" epub:type="noteref">3769</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dan John him madë feast and merry cheer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he him told again full specially,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How he had well y-bought and graciously</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Thanked be God) all whole his merchandise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save that he must, in allë manner wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Maken a chevisance, as for his best;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then he shouldë be in joy and rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dan John answered, “Certes, I am fain<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3770" id="noteref-3770" epub:type="noteref">3770</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ye in health be comë home again:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if that I were rich, as have I bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of twenty thousand shields should ye not miss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ye so kindëly the other day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lentë me gold, and as I can and may</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I thankë you, by God and by Saint Jame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But natheless I took unto our Dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your wife at home, the samë gold again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon your bench; she wot it well, certáin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By certain tokens that I can her tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, by your leave, I may no longer dwell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our abbot will out of this town anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his company I mustë gon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Greet well our Dame, mine owen niecë sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And farewell, dearë cousin, till we meet.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This merchant, which that was full ware and wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Creanced hath, and paid eke in París</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To certain Lombards ready in their hond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sum of gold, and got of them his bond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And home he went, merry as a popinjay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For well he knew he stood in such array</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That needës must he win in that voyáge<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3771" id="noteref-3771" epub:type="noteref">3771</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand francs, above all his costáge.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3772" id="noteref-3772" epub:type="noteref">3772</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>His wife full ready met him at the gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As she was wont of old uságe algate;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3773" id="noteref-3773" epub:type="noteref">3773</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all that night in mirthë they beset;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3774" id="noteref-3774" epub:type="noteref">3774</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he was rich, and clearly out of debt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When it was day, the merchant gan embrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His wife all new, and kiss’d her in her face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And up he went, and maked it full tough.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“No more,” quoth she, “by God ye have enough;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wantonly again with him she play’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till at the last this merchant to her said.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“By God,” quoth he, “I am a little wroth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With you, my wife, although it be me loth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wot ye why? by God, as that I guess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ye have made a manner strangëness<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3775" id="noteref-3775" epub:type="noteref">3775</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betwixtë me and my cousín, Dan John.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye should have warned me, ere I had gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he you had a hundred frankës paid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By ready token; he had him evil apaid<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3776" id="noteref-3776" epub:type="noteref">3776</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that I to him spake of chevisance,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3777" id="noteref-3777" epub:type="noteref">3777</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>(He seemed so as by his countenance);</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But natheless, by God of heaven king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I thoughtë not to ask of him no thing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray thee, wife, do thou no morë so.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell me alway, ere that I from thee go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If any debtor hath in mine absénce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Y-payed thee, lest through thy negligence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I might him ask a thing that he hath paid.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This wife was not afeared nor afraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But boldëly she said, and that anon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Mary! I defy that false monk Dan John,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I keep<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3778" id="noteref-3778" epub:type="noteref">3778</a> not of his tokens never a deal:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3779" id="noteref-3779" epub:type="noteref">3779</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He took me certain gold, I wot it well.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What? evil thedom<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3780" id="noteref-3780" epub:type="noteref">3780</a> on his monkë’s snout!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, God it wot, I ween’d withoutë doubt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he had given it me, because of you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To do therewith mine honour and my prow,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3781" id="noteref-3781" epub:type="noteref">3781</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For cousinage, and eke for <i xml:lang="fr">bellë</i> cheer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he hath had full oftentimë here.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But since I see I stand in such disjoint,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3782" id="noteref-3782" epub:type="noteref">3782</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will answér you shortly to the point.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye have more slackë debtors than am I;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I will pay you well and readily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From day to day, and if so be I fail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am your wife, score it upon my tail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I shall pay as soon as ever I may.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, by my troth, I have on mine array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not in waste, bestow’d it every deal.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, for I have bestowed it so well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For your honoúr, for Goddë’s sake I say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As be not wroth, but let us laugh and play.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye shall my jolly body have to wed;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3783" id="noteref-3783" epub:type="noteref">3783</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>By God, I will not pay you but in bed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgive it me, mine owen spousë dear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turn hitherward, and makë better cheer.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The merchant saw none other remedy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for to chide, it were but a follý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since that the thing might not amended be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now, wife,” he said, “and I forgive it thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But by thy lifë be no more so large;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3784" id="noteref-3784" epub:type="noteref">3784</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keep better my good, this give I thee in charge.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus endeth now my tale; and God us send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Taling enough, until our livës’ end!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
