<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Knight’s Tale</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-knights-tale" epub:type="z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Knight’s Tale<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-277" id="noteref-277" epub:type="noteref">277</a></h2>
			<p>
				<span>Whilom,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-278" id="noteref-278" epub:type="noteref">278</a> as oldë stories tellen us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was a duke that hightë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-279" id="noteref-279" epub:type="noteref">279</a> Theseus.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Athens he was lord and governor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in his timë such a conqueror</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That greater was there none under the sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full many a richë country had he won.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What with his wisdom and his chivalry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He conquer’d all the regne of Feminie,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-280" id="noteref-280" epub:type="noteref">280</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That whilom was y-cleped Scythia;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And weddedë the Queen Hippolyta,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brought her home with him to his country</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With muchel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-281" id="noteref-281" epub:type="noteref">281</a> glory and great solemnity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eke her youngë sister Emily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus with vict’ry and with melody</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let I this worthy Duke to Athens ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all his host, in armës him beside.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And certes, if it n’ere<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-282" id="noteref-282" epub:type="noteref">282</a> too long to hear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I would have told you fully the mannére,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How wonnen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-283" id="noteref-283" epub:type="noteref">283</a> was the regne of Feminie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By Theseus, and by his chivalry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of the greatë battle for the nonce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betwixt Athenës and the Amazons;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And how assieged was Hippolyta,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fairë hardy queen of Scythia;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of the feast that was at her wedding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of the tempest at her homecoming.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all these things I must as now forbear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have, God wot, a largë field to ear;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-284" id="noteref-284" epub:type="noteref">284</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And weakë be the oxen in my plough;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The remnant of my tale is long enow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will not letten eke none of this rout.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-285" id="noteref-285" epub:type="noteref">285</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let every fellow tell his tale about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let see now who shall the supper win.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There as I left,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-286" id="noteref-286" epub:type="noteref">286</a> I will again begin.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This Duke, of whom I makë mentioún,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he was come almost unto the town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all his weal<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-287" id="noteref-287" epub:type="noteref">287</a> and in his mostë pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was ware, as he cast his eye aside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where that there kneeled in the highë way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A company of ladies, tway and tway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each after other, clad in clothës black:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But such a cry and such a woe they make,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in this world n’is creatúre living,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That heardë such another waimenting.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-288" id="noteref-288" epub:type="noteref">288</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of this crying would they never stenten,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-289" id="noteref-289" epub:type="noteref">289</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till they the reinës of his bridle henten.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-290" id="noteref-290" epub:type="noteref">290</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What folk be ye that at mine homecoming</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perturben so my feastë with crying?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quoth Theseus; “Have ye so great envý</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mine honoúr, that thus complain and cry?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or who hath you misboden,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-291" id="noteref-291" epub:type="noteref">291</a> or offended?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do tellë me, if it may be amended;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And why that ye be clad thus all in black?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The oldest lady of them all then spake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When she had swooned, with a deadly cheer,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-292" id="noteref-292" epub:type="noteref">292</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That it was ruthë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-293" id="noteref-293" epub:type="noteref">293</a> for to see or hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She saidë; “Lord, to whom fortúne hath given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vict’ry, and as a conqueror to liven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nought grieveth us your glory and your honoúr;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we beseechen mercy and succóur.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have mercy on our woe and our distress;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some drop of pity, through thy gentleness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon us wretched women let now fall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For certës, lord, there is none of us all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hath not been a duchess or a queen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now be we caitives,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-294" id="noteref-294" epub:type="noteref">294</a> as it is well seen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thanked be Fortune, and her falsë wheel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That none estate ensureth to be wele.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-295" id="noteref-295" epub:type="noteref">295</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And certes, lord, t’ abiden your presénce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here in this temple of the goddess Clemence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We have been waiting all this fortënight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now help us, lord, since it lies in thy might.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I, wretched wight, that weep and wailë thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was whilom wife to king Capaneus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That starf<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-296" id="noteref-296" epub:type="noteref">296</a> at Thebes, cursed be that day:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And allë we that be in this array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And maken all this lamentatioún,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We losten all our husbands at that town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While that the siegë thereabouten lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet the oldë Creon, well-away!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lord is now of Thebes the city,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fulfilled of ire and of iniquity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He for despite, and for his tyranny,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To do the deadë bodies villainy,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-297" id="noteref-297" epub:type="noteref">297</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all our lordës, which that been y-slaw,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-298" id="noteref-298" epub:type="noteref">298</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath all the bodies on an heap y-draw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And will not suffer them by none assent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither to be y-buried, nor y-brent,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-299" id="noteref-299" epub:type="noteref">299</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>But maketh houndës eat them in despite.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with that word, withoutë more respite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They fallen groff,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-300" id="noteref-300" epub:type="noteref">300</a> and cryden piteously;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Have on us wretched women some mercy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let our sorrow sinken in thine heart.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This gentle Duke down from his courser start</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With heartë piteous, when he heard them speak.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him thoughtë that his heart would all to-break,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he saw them so piteous and so mate,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-301" id="noteref-301" epub:type="noteref">301</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That whilom weren of so great estate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in his armës he them all up hent,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-302" id="noteref-302" epub:type="noteref">302</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And them comfórted in full good intent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And swore his oath, as he was truë knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wouldë do so farforthly his might<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-303" id="noteref-303" epub:type="noteref">303</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the tyrant Creon them to wreak,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-304" id="noteref-304" epub:type="noteref">304</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all the people of Greecë shouldë speak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How Creon was of Theseus y-served,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he that had his death full well deserved.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And right anon withoutë more abode<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-305" id="noteref-305" epub:type="noteref">305</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>His banner he display’d, and forth he rode</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Thebes-ward, and all his host beside:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No ner<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-306" id="noteref-306" epub:type="noteref">306</a> Athenës would he go nor ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor take his easë fully half a day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But onward on his way that night he lay:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sent anon Hippolyta the queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Emily her youngë sister sheen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-307" id="noteref-307" epub:type="noteref">307</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the town of Athens for to dwell:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And forth he rit;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-308" id="noteref-308" epub:type="noteref">308</a> there is no more to tell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The red statúe of Mars with spear and targe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So shineth in his whitë banner large,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all the fieldës glitter up and down:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by his banner borne is his pennon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of gold full rich, in which there was y-beat<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-309" id="noteref-309" epub:type="noteref">309</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Minotaur<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-310" id="noteref-310" epub:type="noteref">310</a> which that he slew in Crete.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus rit this Duke, thus rit this conquerour,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in his host of chivalry the flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till that he came to Thebes, and alight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair in a field, there as he thought to fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But shortly for to speaken of this thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Creon, which that was of Thebes king,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fought, and slew him manly as a knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In plain batáille, and put his folk to flight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by assault he won the city after,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rent adown both wall, and spar, and rafter;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the ladies he restored again</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bodies of their husbands that were slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To do obséquies, as was then the guise.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-311" id="noteref-311" epub:type="noteref">311</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But it were all too long for to devise<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-312" id="noteref-312" epub:type="noteref">312</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The greatë clamour, and the waimenting,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-313" id="noteref-313" epub:type="noteref">313</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which that the ladies made at the brenning<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-314" id="noteref-314" epub:type="noteref">314</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the bodiës, and the great honour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Theseus the noble conqueror</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did to the ladies, when they from him went:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But shortly for to tell is mine intent.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When that this worthy Duke, this Theseus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had Creon slain, and wonnen Thebés thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still in the field he took all night his rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And did with all the country as him lest.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-315" id="noteref-315" epub:type="noteref">315</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>To ransack in the tas<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-316" id="noteref-316" epub:type="noteref">316</a> of bodies dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Them for to strip of harness and of weed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-317" id="noteref-317" epub:type="noteref">317</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pillers<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-318" id="noteref-318" epub:type="noteref">318</a> did their business and cure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After the battle and discomfiture.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so befell, that in the tas they found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through girt with many a grievous bloody wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two youngë knightës ligging by and by<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-319" id="noteref-319" epub:type="noteref">319</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both in one armës,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-320" id="noteref-320" epub:type="noteref">320</a> wrought full richëly:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of whichë two, Arcita hight that one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he that other hightë Palamon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not fully quick, nor fully dead they were,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But by their coat-armoúr, and by their gear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heralds knew them well in speciál,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As those that weren of the blood royál</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Thebes, and of sistren two y-born.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-321" id="noteref-321" epub:type="noteref">321</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the tas the pillers have them torn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And have them carried soft unto the tent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Theseus, and he full soon them sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Athens, for to dwellen in prisón</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perpetually, he n’oldë no ranson.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-322" id="noteref-322" epub:type="noteref">322</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when this worthy Duke had thus y-done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He took his host, and home he rit anon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With laurel crowned as a conquerour;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there he lived in joy and in honour</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Term of his life;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-323" id="noteref-323" epub:type="noteref">323</a> what needeth wordës mo’?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in a tower, in anguish and in woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dwellen this Palamon, and eke Arcite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For evermore, there may no gold them quite.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-324" id="noteref-324" epub:type="noteref">324</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus passed year by year, and day by day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till it fell onës in a morn of May</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Emily, that fairer was to seen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than is the lily upon his stalkë green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fresher than the May with flowers new</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(For with the rosë colour strove her hue;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I n’ot<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-325" id="noteref-325" epub:type="noteref">325</a> which was the finer of them two),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere it was day, as she was wont to do,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She was arisen, and all ready dight,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-326" id="noteref-326" epub:type="noteref">326</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For May will have no sluggardy a-night;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The season pricketh every gentle heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And maketh him out of his sleep to start,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saith, “Arise, and do thine óbservance.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This maketh Emily have rémembrance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To do honoúr to May, and for to rise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Y-clothed was she fresh for to devise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her yellow hair was braided in a tress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behind her back, a yardë long I guess.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the garden at the sun uprist<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-327" id="noteref-327" epub:type="noteref">327</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>She walketh up and down where as her list.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She gathereth flowers, party<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-328" id="noteref-328" epub:type="noteref">328</a> white and red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make a sotel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-329" id="noteref-329" epub:type="noteref">329</a> garland for her head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as an angel heavenly she sung.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The greatë tower, that was so thick and strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which of the castle was the chief dungeón<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-330" id="noteref-330" epub:type="noteref">330</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Where as these knightës weren in prisón,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of which I toldë you, and tellë shall),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was even joinant<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-331" id="noteref-331" epub:type="noteref">331</a> to the garden wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There as this Emily had her playing.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Bright was the sun, and clear that morrowning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Palamon, this woful prisoner,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As was his wont, by leave of his gaoler,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was ris’n, and roamed in a chamber on high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which he all the noble city sigh,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-332" id="noteref-332" epub:type="noteref">332</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eke the garden, full of branches green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There as this fresh Emelia the sheen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was in her walk, and roamed up and down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This sorrowful prisoner, this Palamon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went in his chamber roaming to and fro,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to himself complaining of his woe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he was born, full oft he said, Alas!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And so befell, by áventure or cas,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-333" id="noteref-333" epub:type="noteref">333</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That through a window thick of many a bar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of iron great, and square as any spar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He cast his eyes upon Emelia,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therewithal he blent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-334" id="noteref-334" epub:type="noteref">334</a> and cried, Ah!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though he stungen were unto the heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with that cry Arcite anon up start,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saidë, “Cousin mine, what aileth thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That art so pale and deadly for to see?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why cried’st thou? who hath thee done offence?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Goddë’s love, take all in patience</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our prison,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-335" id="noteref-335" epub:type="noteref">335</a> for it may none other be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fortune hath giv’n us this adversity’.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some wick’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-336" id="noteref-336" epub:type="noteref">336</a> aspéct or dispositión</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Saturn, by some constellatión,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath giv’n us this, although we had it sworn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So stood the heaven when that we were born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We must endure; this is the short and plain.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This Palamon answér’d, and said again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Cousin, forsooth of this opinión</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast a vain imaginatión.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This prison caused me not for to cry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I was hurt right now thorough mine eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into mine heart; that will my banë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-337" id="noteref-337" epub:type="noteref">337</a> be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fairness of the lady that I see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yond in the garden roaming to and fro,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is cause of all my crying and my woe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I n’ot whe’r<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-338" id="noteref-338" epub:type="noteref">338</a> she be woman or goddéss.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Venus is it, soothly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-339" id="noteref-339" epub:type="noteref">339</a> as I guess.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therewithal on knees adown he fill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saidë: “Venus, if it be your will</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You in this garden thus to transfigúre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before me sorrowful wretched creatúre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of this prison help that we may scape.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if so be our destiny be shape</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By etern word to dien in prisón,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of our lineage have some compassión,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That is so low y-brought by tyranny.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And with that word Arcita gan espy<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-340" id="noteref-340" epub:type="noteref">340</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where as this lady roamed to and fro.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with that sight her beauty hurt him so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That if that Palamon was wounded sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arcite is hurt as much as he, or more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with a sigh he saidë piteously:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The freshë beauty slay’th me suddenly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of her that roameth yonder in the place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And but<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-341" id="noteref-341" epub:type="noteref">341</a> I have her mercy and her grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I may see her at the leastë way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am but dead; there is no more to say.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Palamon, when he these wordës heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dispiteously<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-342" id="noteref-342" epub:type="noteref">342</a> he looked, and answér’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Whether say’st thou this in earnest or in play?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nay,” quoth Arcite, “in earnest, by my fay.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-343" id="noteref-343" epub:type="noteref">343</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>God help me so, me lust full ill to play.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-344" id="noteref-344" epub:type="noteref">344</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Palamon gan knit his browës tway.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“It were,” quoth he, “to thee no great honoúr</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For to be false, nor for to be traitoúr</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me, that am thy cousin and thy brother</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Y-sworn full deep, and each of us to other,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That never for to dien in the pain,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-345" id="noteref-345" epub:type="noteref">345</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till that the death departen shall us twain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither of us in love to hinder other,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor in none other case, my levë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-346" id="noteref-346" epub:type="noteref">346</a> brother;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that thou shouldest truly farther me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In every case, as I should farther thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This was thine oath, and mine also certáin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wot it well, thou dar’st it not withsayn.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-347" id="noteref-347" epub:type="noteref">347</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus art thou of my counsel out of doubt.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now thou wouldest falsely be about</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To love my lady, whom I love and serve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever shall, until mine heartë sterve.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-348" id="noteref-348" epub:type="noteref">348</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now certes, false Arcite, thou shalt not so.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I lov’d her first, and toldë thee my woe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As to my counsel, and my brother sworn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To farther me, as I have told beforn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For which thou art y-bounden as a knight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To helpë me, if it lie in thy might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or ellës art thou false, I dare well sayn,”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This Arcita full proudly spake again:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou shalt,” quoth he, “be rather<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-349" id="noteref-349" epub:type="noteref">349</a> false than I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou art false, I tell thee utterly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For <i xml:lang="fr">par amour</i> I lov’d her first ere thou.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What wilt thou say? thou wist it not right now<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-350" id="noteref-350" epub:type="noteref">350</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether she be a woman or goddéss.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine is affectión of holiness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mine is love, as to a creature:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For which I toldë thee mine áventure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As to my cousin, and my brother sworn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I posë,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-351" id="noteref-351" epub:type="noteref">351</a> that thou loved’st her beforn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wost<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-352" id="noteref-352" epub:type="noteref">352</a> thou not well the oldë clerkë’s saw,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-353" id="noteref-353" epub:type="noteref">353</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That who shall give a lover any law?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love is a greater lawë, by my pan,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-354" id="noteref-354" epub:type="noteref">354</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than may be giv’n to any earthly man:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore positive law, and such decree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is broke alway for love in each degree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man must needës love, maugré his head.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-355" id="noteref-355" epub:type="noteref">355</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>He may not flee it, though he should be dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All be she<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-356" id="noteref-356" epub:type="noteref">356</a> maid, or widow, or else wife.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eke it is not likely all thy life</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To standen in her grace, no more than I:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For well thou wost thyselfë verily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou and I be damned to prisón</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perpetual, us gaineth no ranson.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We strive, as did the houndës for the bone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They fought all day, and yet their part was none.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There came a kite, while that they were so wroth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bare away the bone betwixt them both.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therefore at the kingë’s court, my brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each man for himselfë, there is no other.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love if thee list; for I love and aye shall:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And soothly, levë brother, this is all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here in this prison musten we endure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And each of us takë his áventúre.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Great was the strife and long betwixt them tway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If that I haddë leisure for to say;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But to the effect: it happen’d on a day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(To tell it you as shortly as I may),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A worthy duke that hight Perithous,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That fellow was to the Duke Theseus<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-357" id="noteref-357" epub:type="noteref">357</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since thilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-358" id="noteref-358" epub:type="noteref">358</a> day that they were children lite,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-359" id="noteref-359" epub:type="noteref">359</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was come to Athéns, his fellow to visite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for to play, as he was wont to do;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in this world he loved no man so;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he lov’d him as tenderly again.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So well they lov’d, as oldë bookës sayn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That when that one was dead, soothly to tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fellow went and sought him down in hell:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But of that story list me not to write.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Duke Perithous loved well Arcite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And had him known at Thebes year by year:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And finally at réquest and prayére</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Perithous, withoutë ransón</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Duke Theseus him let out of prisón,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freely to go, where him list over all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In such a guise, as I you tellen shall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This was the forword,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-360" id="noteref-360" epub:type="noteref">360</a> plainly to indite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betwixtë Theseus and him Arcite:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That if so were, that Arcite were y-found</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever in his life, by day or night, one stound<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-361" id="noteref-361" epub:type="noteref">361</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>In any country of this Theseus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he were caught, it was accorded thus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That with a sword he shouldë lose his head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was none other remedy nor rede.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-362" id="noteref-362" epub:type="noteref">362</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>But took his leave, and homeward he him sped;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let him beware, his neckë lieth to wed.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-363" id="noteref-363" epub:type="noteref">363</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>How great a sorrow suff’reth now Arcite!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The death he feeleth through his heartë smite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He weepeth, waileth, crieth piteously;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To slay himself he waiteth privily.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said; “Alas the day that I was born!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now is my prison worsë than beforn:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now is me shape<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-364" id="noteref-364" epub:type="noteref">364</a> eternally to dwell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not in purgatory, but right in hell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas! that ever I knew Perithous.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ellës had I dwelt with Theseus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Y-fettered in his prison evermo’.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then had I been in bliss, and not in woe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only the sight of her, whom that I serve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though that I never may her grace deserve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would have sufficed right enough for me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O dearë cousin Palamon,” quoth he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thine is the vict’ry of this áventúre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full blissfully in prison to endure:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In prison? nay certes, in paradise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well hath fortúne y-turned thee the dice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hast the sight of her, and I th’ absénce.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For possible is, since thou hast her presénce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And art a knight, a worthy and an able,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That by some cas,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-365" id="noteref-365" epub:type="noteref">365</a> since fortune is changeáble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou may’st to thy desire sometime attain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I that am exiled, and barrén</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of allë grace, and in so great despair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That there n’is earthë, water, fire, nor air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor creature, that of them maked is,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That may me helpë nor comfort in this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well ought I sterve in wanhope<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-366" id="noteref-366" epub:type="noteref">366</a> and distress.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Farewell my life, my lust,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-367" id="noteref-367" epub:type="noteref">367</a> and my gladnéss.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas, why plainen men so in commúne</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of purveyance of God,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-368" id="noteref-368" epub:type="noteref">368</a> or of Fortúne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That giveth them full oft in many a guise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well better than they can themselves devise?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some man desireth for to have richess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That cause is of his murder or great sickness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some man would out of his prison fain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in his house is of his meinie<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-369" id="noteref-369" epub:type="noteref">369</a> slain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Infinite harmës be in this mattére.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We wot never what thing we pray for here.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We fare as he that drunk is as a mouse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A drunken man wot well he hath an house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he wot not which is the right way thither,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to a drunken man the way is slither.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-370" id="noteref-370" epub:type="noteref">370</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And certes in this world so farë we.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We seekë fast after felicity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But we go wrong full often truëly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus we may sayen all, and namely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-371" id="noteref-371" epub:type="noteref">371</a> I,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ween’d,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-372" id="noteref-372" epub:type="noteref">372</a> and had a great opinión,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That if I might escapë from prisón</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then had I been in joy and perfect heal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where now I am exiled from my weal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since that I may not see you, Emily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am but dead; there is no remedy.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Upon that other sidë, Palamon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When that he wist Arcita was agone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much sorrow maketh, that the greatë tower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resounded of his yelling and clamoúr.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The purë fetters<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-373" id="noteref-373" epub:type="noteref">373</a> on his shinnës great</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were of his bitter saltë tearës wet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Alas!” quoth he, “Arcita, cousin mine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all our strife, God wot, the fruit is thine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou walkest now in Thebes at thy large,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of my woe thou givest little charge.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-374" id="noteref-374" epub:type="noteref">374</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou mayst, since thou hast wisdom and manhead,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-375" id="noteref-375" epub:type="noteref">375</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assemble all the folk of our kindréd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And make a war so sharp on this countrý,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That by some áventure, or some treatý,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou mayst have her to lady and to wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For whom that I must needës lose my life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For as by way of possibility,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since thou art at thy large, of prison free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And art a lord, great is thine ávantage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>More than is mine, that sterve<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-376" id="noteref-376" epub:type="noteref">376</a> here in a cage.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I must weep and wail, while that I live,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all the woe that prison may me give,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eke with pain that love me gives also,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That doubles all my torment and my woe.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Therewith the fire of jealousy upstart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within his breast, and hent him by the heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So woodly,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-377" id="noteref-377" epub:type="noteref">377</a> that he like was to behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The box-tree, or the ashes dead and cold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then said; “O cruel goddess, that govérn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This world with binding of your word etern,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-378" id="noteref-378" epub:type="noteref">378</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And writen in the table of adamant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your parlement<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-379" id="noteref-379" epub:type="noteref">379</a> and your eternal grant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What is mankind more unto you y-hold<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-380" id="noteref-380" epub:type="noteref">380</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than is the sheep, that rouketh<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-381" id="noteref-381" epub:type="noteref">381</a> in the fold!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For slain is man, right as another beast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dwelleth eke in prison and arrest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hath sicknéss, and great adversity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And oftentimës guiltëless, pardie.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-382" id="noteref-382" epub:type="noteref">382</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>What governance is in your prescience,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That guiltëless tormenteth innocence?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet increaseth this all my penance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That man is bounden to his observance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Goddë’s sake to letten of his will,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-383" id="noteref-383" epub:type="noteref">383</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereas a beast may all his lust<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-384" id="noteref-384" epub:type="noteref">384</a> fulfil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when a beast is dead, he hath no pain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But man after his death must weep and plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though in this worldë he have care and woe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withoutë doubt it mayë standen so.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The answer of this leave I to divinës,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But well I wot, that in this world great pine<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-385" id="noteref-385" epub:type="noteref">385</a> is:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas! I see a serpent or a thief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That many a truë man hath done mischief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go at his large, and where him list may turn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I must be in prison through Saturn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eke through Juno, jealous and eke wood,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-386" id="noteref-386" epub:type="noteref">386</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hath well nigh destroyed all the blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Thebes, with his wastë wallës wide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Venus slay’th me on that other side</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For jealousy, and fear of him, Arcite.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now will I stent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-387" id="noteref-387" epub:type="noteref">387</a> of Palamon a lite,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-388" id="noteref-388" epub:type="noteref">388</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let him in his prison stillë dwell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of Arcita forth I will you tell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The summer passeth, and the nightës long</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Increasë double-wise the painës strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both of the lover and the prisonére.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I n’ot<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-389" id="noteref-389" epub:type="noteref">389</a> which hath the wofuller mistére.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-390" id="noteref-390" epub:type="noteref">390</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, shortly for to say, this Palamon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perpetually is damned to prisón,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In chainës and in fetters to be dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Arcite is exiled on his head<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-391" id="noteref-391" epub:type="noteref">391</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For evermore as out of that country,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor never more he shall his lady see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You lovers ask I now this question,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-392" id="noteref-392" epub:type="noteref">392</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who lieth the worse, Arcite or Palamon?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The one may see his lady day by day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in prison he dwellë must alway.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The other where him list may ride or go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But see his lady shall he never mo’.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now deem all as you listë, ye that can,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I will tell you forth as I began.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When that Arcite to Thebes comen was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full oft a day he swelt,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-393" id="noteref-393" epub:type="noteref">393</a> and said, “Alas!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For see this lady he shall never mo’.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shortly to concluden all his woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So much sorrow had never creatúre</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That is or shall be while the world may dure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sleep, his meat, his drink is him byraft,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-394" id="noteref-394" epub:type="noteref">394</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lean he wex,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-395" id="noteref-395" epub:type="noteref">395</a> and dry as any shaft.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-396" id="noteref-396" epub:type="noteref">396</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyen hollow, grisly to behold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hue fallow,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-397" id="noteref-397" epub:type="noteref">397</a> and pale as ashes cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And solitary he was, ever alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wailing all the night, making his moan.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if he heardë song or instrument,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then would he weepen, he might not be stent.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-398" id="noteref-398" epub:type="noteref">398</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>So feeble were his spirits, and so low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And changed so, that no man couldë know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His speech, neither his voice, though men it heard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in his gear<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-399" id="noteref-399" epub:type="noteref">399</a> for all the world he far’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not only like the lovers’ malady</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Eros, but rather y-like maníe,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-400" id="noteref-400" epub:type="noteref">400</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Engender’d of humoúrs meláncholic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before his head in his cell fántastic.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-401" id="noteref-401" epub:type="noteref">401</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shortly turned was all upside down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both habit and eke dispositioún,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of him, this woful lover Dan<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-402" id="noteref-402" epub:type="noteref">402</a> Arcite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why should I all day of his woe indite?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he endured had a year or two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This cruel torment, and this pain and woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Thebes, in his country, as I said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a night in sleep as he him laid,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him thought how that the winged god Mercúry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before him stood, and bade him to be merry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sleepy yard<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-403" id="noteref-403" epub:type="noteref">403</a> in hand he bare upright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hat he wore upon his hairës bright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arrayed was this god (as he took keep)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-404" id="noteref-404" epub:type="noteref">404</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he was when that Argus<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-405" id="noteref-405" epub:type="noteref">405</a> took his sleep;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And said him thus: “To Athens shalt thou wend;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-406" id="noteref-406" epub:type="noteref">406</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is thee shapen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-407" id="noteref-407" epub:type="noteref">407</a> of thy woe an end.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with that word Arcite woke and start.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now truëly how sore that e’er me smart,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quoth he, “to Athens right now will I fare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor for no dread of death shall I not spare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see my lady that I love and serve;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her presénce I reckë not to sterve.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-408" id="noteref-408" epub:type="noteref">408</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with that word he caught a great mirrór,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saw that changed was all his colór,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saw his visage all in other kind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And right anon it ran him ill his mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That since his facë was so disfigúr’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of malady the which he had endúr’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He mightë well, if that he bare him low,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-409" id="noteref-409" epub:type="noteref">409</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Live in Athenës evermore unknow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And see his lady well-nigh day by day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And right anon he changed his array,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And clad him as a poorë labourer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all alone, save only a squiér,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That knew his privity<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-410" id="noteref-410" epub:type="noteref">410</a> and all his cas,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-411" id="noteref-411" epub:type="noteref">411</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which was disguised poorly as he was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Athens is he gone the nextë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-412" id="noteref-412" epub:type="noteref">412</a> way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the court he went upon a day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at the gate he proffer’d his service,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To drudge and draw, what so men would devise.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-413" id="noteref-413" epub:type="noteref">413</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, shortly of this matter for to sayn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fell in office with a chamberlain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The which that dwelling was with Emily.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he was wise, and couldë soon espy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of every servant which that served her.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well could he hewë wood, and water bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he was young and mighty for the nones,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-414" id="noteref-414" epub:type="noteref">414</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thereto he was strong and big of bones</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To do that any wight can him devise.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A year or two he was in this servíce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Page of the chamber of Emily the bright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Philostrate he saidë that he hight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But half so well belov’d a man as he</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ne was there never in court of his degree.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was so gentle of conditioún,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That throughout all the court was his renown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They saidë that it were a charity</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Theseus would énhance his degree,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-415" id="noteref-415" epub:type="noteref">415</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And put him in some worshipful servíce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There as he might his virtue exercise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus within a while his namë sprung</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both of his deedës, and of his good tongue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Theseus hath taken him so near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That of his chamber he hath made him squire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave him gold to máintain his degree;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eke men brought him out of his country</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From year to year full privily his rent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But honestly and slyly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-416" id="noteref-416" epub:type="noteref">416</a> he it spent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That no man wonder’d how that he it had.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And three year in this wise his life be lad,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-417" id="noteref-417" epub:type="noteref">417</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bare him so in peace and eke in werre,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-418" id="noteref-418" epub:type="noteref">418</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was no man that Theseus had so derre.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-419" id="noteref-419" epub:type="noteref">419</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in this blissë leave I now Arcite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And speak I will of Palamon a lite.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-420" id="noteref-420" epub:type="noteref">420</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In darkness horrible, and strong prisón,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This seven year hath sitten Palamon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forpined,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-421" id="noteref-421" epub:type="noteref">421</a> what for love, and for distress.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who feeleth double sorrow and heaviness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Palamon? that love distraineth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-422" id="noteref-422" epub:type="noteref">422</a> so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wood<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-423" id="noteref-423" epub:type="noteref">423</a> out of his wits he went for woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eke thereto he is a prisonére</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perpetual, not only for a year.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who couldë rhyme in English properly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His martyrdom? forsooth, it is not I;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-424" id="noteref-424" epub:type="noteref">424</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore I pass as lightly as I may.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It fell that in the seventh year, in May</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thirdë night (as oldë bookës sayn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all this story tellen morë plain),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were it by áventure or destiny</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(As, when a thing is shapen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-425" id="noteref-425" epub:type="noteref">425</a> it shall be),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, soon after the midnight, Palamon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By helping of a friend brake his prisón,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fled the city fast as he might go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he had given drink his gaoler so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a clary,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-426" id="noteref-426" epub:type="noteref">426</a> made of a certain wine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With narcotise and opie<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-427" id="noteref-427" epub:type="noteref">427</a> of Thebes fine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all the night, though that men would him shake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gaoler slept, he mightë not awake:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus he fled as fast as ever he may.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The night was short, and fastë by the day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That needës cast he must<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-428" id="noteref-428" epub:type="noteref">428</a> himself to hide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to a grovë fastë there beside</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With dreadful foot then stalked Palamon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For shortly this was his opinión,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in the grove he would him hide all day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the night then would he take his way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Thebes-ward, his friendës for to pray</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On Theseus to help him to warray.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-429" id="noteref-429" epub:type="noteref">429</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shortly either he would lose his life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or winnen Emily unto his wife.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is th’ effect, and his intention plain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now will I turn to Arcita again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That little wist how nighë was his care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till that Fortúne had brought him in the snare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The busy lark, the messenger of day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saluteth in her song the morning gray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fiery Phoebus riseth up so bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all the orient laugheth at the sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with his streamës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-430" id="noteref-430" epub:type="noteref">430</a> drieth in the greves<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-431" id="noteref-431" epub:type="noteref">431</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The silver droppës, hanging on the leaves;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Arcite, that is in the court royál</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With Theseus, his squier principal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is ris’n, and looketh on the merry day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for to do his óbservance to May,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Remembering the point<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-432" id="noteref-432" epub:type="noteref">432</a> of his desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He on his courser, starting as the fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is ridden to the fieldës him to play,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the court, were it a mile or tway.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the grove, of which I have you told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By áventure his way began to hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To makë him a garland of the greves,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-433" id="noteref-433" epub:type="noteref">433</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were it of woodbine, or of hawthorn leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And loud he sang against the sun so sheen.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-434" id="noteref-434" epub:type="noteref">434</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O May, with all thy flowers and thy green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right welcome be thou, fairë freshë May,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I hope that I some green here getten may.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from his courser, with a lusty heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the grove full hastily he start,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in a path he roamed up and down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There as by áventure this Palamon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was in a bush, that no man might him see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For sore afeard of his death was he.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing ne knew he that it was Arcite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God wot he would have trowed it full lite.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-435" id="noteref-435" epub:type="noteref">435</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>But sooth is said, gone since full many years,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-436" id="noteref-436" epub:type="noteref">436</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The field hath eyen, and the wood hath ears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is full fair a man to bear him even,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-437" id="noteref-437" epub:type="noteref">437</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all day meeten men at unset steven.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-438" id="noteref-438" epub:type="noteref">438</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full little wot Arcite of his felláw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That was so nigh to hearken of his saw,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-439" id="noteref-439" epub:type="noteref">439</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in the bush he sitteth now full still.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When that Arcite had roamed all his fill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sungen all the roundel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-440" id="noteref-440" epub:type="noteref">440</a> lustily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into a study he fell suddenly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As do those lovers in their quaintë gears,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-441" id="noteref-441" epub:type="noteref">441</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now in the crop, and now down in the breres,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-442" id="noteref-442" epub:type="noteref">442</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now up, now down, as bucket in a well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right as the Friday, soothly for to tell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now shineth it, and now it raineth fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right so can geary<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-443" id="noteref-443" epub:type="noteref">443</a> Venus overcast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heartës of her folk, right as her day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is gearful,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-444" id="noteref-444" epub:type="noteref">444</a> right so changeth she array.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seldom is Friday all the weekë like.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Arcite had y-sung, he gan to sike,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-445" id="noteref-445" epub:type="noteref">445</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sat him down withouten any more:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Alas!” quoth he, “the day that I was bore!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How longë, Juno, through thy cruelty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt thou warrayen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-446" id="noteref-446" epub:type="noteref">446</a> Thebes the city?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas! y-brought is to confusion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blood royál of Cadm’ and Amphion:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Cadmus, which that was the firstë man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Thebes built, or first the town began,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of the city first was crowned king.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his lineáge am I, and his offspring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By very line, as of the stock royál;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now I am so caitiff and so thrall,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-447" id="noteref-447" epub:type="noteref">447</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he that is my mortal enemy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I serve him as his squiër poorëly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet doth Juno me well morë shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I dare not beknow<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-448" id="noteref-448" epub:type="noteref">448</a> mine owen name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But there as I was wont to hight Arcite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now hight I Philostrate, not worth a mite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas! thou fell Mars, and alas! Juno,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus hath your ire our lineage all fordo’.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-449" id="noteref-449" epub:type="noteref">449</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save only me, and wretched Palamon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Theseus martýreth in prisón.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And over all this, to slay me utterly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love hath his fiery dart so brenningly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-450" id="noteref-450" epub:type="noteref">450</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Y-sticked through my truë careful heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That shapen was my death erst than my shert.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-451" id="noteref-451" epub:type="noteref">451</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye slay me with your eyen, Emily;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye be the causë wherefore that I die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all the remnant of mine other care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ne set I not the mountance of a tare,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-452" id="noteref-452" epub:type="noteref">452</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that I could do aught to your pleasance.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And with that word he fell down in a trance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A longë time; and afterward upstart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Palamon, that thought thorough his heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He felt a cold sword suddenly to glide:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ire he quoke,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-453" id="noteref-453" epub:type="noteref">453</a> no longer would he hide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when that he had heard Arcite’s tale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he were wood,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-454" id="noteref-454" epub:type="noteref">454</a> with facë dead and pale,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He start him up out of the bushes thick,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And said: “False Arcita, false traitor wick’,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-455" id="noteref-455" epub:type="noteref">455</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now art thou hent,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-456" id="noteref-456" epub:type="noteref">456</a> that lov’st my lady so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For whom that I have all this pain and woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And art my blood, and to my counsel sworn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I full oft have told thee herebeforn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hast bejaped<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-457" id="noteref-457" epub:type="noteref">457</a> here Duke Theseus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And falsely changed hast thy namë thus;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will be dead, or ellës thou shalt die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt not love my lady Emily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I will love her only and no mo’;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I am Palamon thy mortal foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though I have no weapon in this place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But out of prison am astart<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-458" id="noteref-458" epub:type="noteref">458</a> by grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I dreadë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-459" id="noteref-459" epub:type="noteref">459</a> not that either thou shalt die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or else thou shalt not loven Emily.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Choose which thou wilt, for thou shalt not astart.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This Arcite then, with full dispiteous<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-460" id="noteref-460" epub:type="noteref">460</a> heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he him knew, and had his talë heard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As fierce as lion pulled out a swerd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saidë thus; “By God that sitt’th above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>N’ere it<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-461" id="noteref-461" epub:type="noteref">461</a> that thou art sick, and wood for love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eke that thou no weap’n hast in this place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou should’st never out of this grovë pace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou ne shouldest dien of mine hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For I defy the surety and the band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which that thou sayest I have made to thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What? very fool, think well that love is free;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I will love her maugré<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-462" id="noteref-462" epub:type="noteref">462</a> all thy might.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, for thou art a worthy gentle knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wilnest to darraine her by bataille,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-463" id="noteref-463" epub:type="noteref">463</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have here my troth, to-morrow I will not fail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Without weeting<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-464" id="noteref-464" epub:type="noteref">464</a> of any other wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That here I will be founden as a knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bringë harness<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-465" id="noteref-465" epub:type="noteref">465</a> right enough for thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And choose the best, and leave the worst for me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And meat and drinkë this night will I bring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enough for thee, and clothes for thy beddíng.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if so be that thou my lady win,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slay me in this wood that I am in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou may’st well have thy lady as for me.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Palamon answér’d, “I grant it thee.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus they be departed till the morrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When each of them hath laid his faith to borrow.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-466" id="noteref-466" epub:type="noteref">466</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>O Cupid, out of allë charity!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Regne<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-467" id="noteref-467" epub:type="noteref">467</a> that wilt no fellow have with thee!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full sooth is said, that love nor lordëship</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will not, his thanks,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-468" id="noteref-468" epub:type="noteref">468</a> have any fellowship.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well finden that Arcite and Palamon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arcite is ridd anon unto the town,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the morrow, ere it were daylight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full privily two harness hath he dight,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-469" id="noteref-469" epub:type="noteref">469</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both suffisant and meetë to darraine<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-470" id="noteref-470" epub:type="noteref">470</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The battle in the field betwixt them twain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on his horse, alone as he was born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He carrieth all this harness him beforn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the grove, at time and place y-set,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Arcite and this Palamon be met.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then changë gan the colour of their face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right as the hunter in the regne<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-471" id="noteref-471" epub:type="noteref">471</a> of Thrace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That standeth at a gappë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-472" id="noteref-472" epub:type="noteref">472</a> with a spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When hunted is the lion or the bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heareth him come rushing in the greves,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-473" id="noteref-473" epub:type="noteref">473</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And breaking both the boughës and the leaves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thinketh, “Here comes my mortal enemy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withoutë fail, he must be dead or I;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For either I must slay him at the gap;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or he must slay me, if that me mishap:”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So fared they, in changing of their hue</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As far as either of them other knew.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-474" id="noteref-474" epub:type="noteref">474</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was no good day, and no saluting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But straight, withoutë wordës rehearsing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evereach of them holp to arm the other,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As friendly, as he were his owen brother.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after that, with sharpë spearës strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They foined<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-475" id="noteref-475" epub:type="noteref">475</a> each at other wonder long.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou mightest weenë,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-476" id="noteref-476" epub:type="noteref">476</a> that this Palamon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his fighting were as a wood<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-477" id="noteref-477" epub:type="noteref">477</a> lion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as a cruel tiger was Arcite:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As wildë boars gan they together smite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That froth as white as foam, for irë wood.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-478" id="noteref-478" epub:type="noteref">478</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up to the ancle fought they in their blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in this wise I let them fighting dwell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And forth I will of Theseus you tell.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Destiny, minister general,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That executeth in the world o’er all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The purveyánce,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-479" id="noteref-479" epub:type="noteref">479</a> that God hath seen beforn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So strong it is, that though the world had sworn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The contrary of a thing by yea or nay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet some time it shall fallën on a day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That falleth not eft<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-480" id="noteref-480" epub:type="noteref">480</a> in a thousand year.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For certainly our appetitës here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be it of war, or peace, or hate, or love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All is this ruled by the sight<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-481" id="noteref-481" epub:type="noteref">481</a> above.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This mean I now by mighty Theseus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That for to hunten is so desiroús⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And namëly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-482" id="noteref-482" epub:type="noteref">482</a> the greatë hart in May⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in his bed there dawneth him no day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he n’is clad, and ready for to ride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With hunt and horn, and houndës him beside.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in his hunting hath he such delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That it is all his joy and appetite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be himself the greatë hartë’s bane;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-483" id="noteref-483" epub:type="noteref">483</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For after Mars he serveth now Diane.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clear was the day, as I have told ere this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Theseus, with allë joy and bliss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his Hippolyta, the fairë queen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Emily, y-clothed all in green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On hunting be they ridden royally.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the grove, that stood there fastë by,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which there was an hart, as men him told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Duke Theseus the straightë way doth hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the laund<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-484" id="noteref-484" epub:type="noteref">484</a> he rideth him full right,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was the hart y-wont to have his flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And over a brook, and so forth on his way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Duke will have a course at him or tway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With houndës, such as him lust<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-485" id="noteref-485" epub:type="noteref">485</a> to command.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when this Duke was comë to the laund,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the sun he looked, and anon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was ware of Arcite and Palamon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That foughtë breme,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-486" id="noteref-486" epub:type="noteref">486</a> as it were bullës two.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The brightë swordës wentë to and fro</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So hideously, that with the leastë stroke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seemed that it wouldë fell an oak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But what they werë, nothing yet he wote.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Duke his courser with his spurrës smote,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at a start<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-487" id="noteref-487" epub:type="noteref">487</a> he was betwixt them two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pulled out a sword and cried, “Ho!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No more, on pain of losing of your head.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By mighty Mars, he shall anon be dead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That smiteth any stroke, that I may see!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But tell to me what mister<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-488" id="noteref-488" epub:type="noteref">488</a> men ye be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That be so hardy for to fightë here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withoutë judge or other officer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though it were in listës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-489" id="noteref-489" epub:type="noteref">489</a> royally.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This Palamon answered hastily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saidë: “Sir, what needeth wordës mo’?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We have the death deserved bothë two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two woful wretches be we, and caitíves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That be accumbered<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-490" id="noteref-490" epub:type="noteref">490</a> of our own lives,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as thou art a rightful lord and judge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So give us neither mercy nor refuge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And slay me first, for saintë charity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But slay my fellow eke as well as me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or slay him first; for, though thou know it lite,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-491" id="noteref-491" epub:type="noteref">491</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is thy mortal foe, this is Arcite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That from thy land is banisht on his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For which he hath deserved to be dead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this is he that came unto thy gate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saidë, that he hightë Philostrate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus hath he japed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-492" id="noteref-492" epub:type="noteref">492</a> thee full many year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thou hast made of him thy chief esquiér;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this is he, that loveth Emily.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For since the day is come that I shall die</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I makë pleinly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-493" id="noteref-493" epub:type="noteref">493</a> my confessión,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I am thilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-494" id="noteref-494" epub:type="noteref">494</a> woful Palamon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hath thy prison broken wickedly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am thy mortal foe, and it am I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That so hot loveth Emily the bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I would die here present in her sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore I askë death and my jewise.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-495" id="noteref-495" epub:type="noteref">495</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>But slay my fellow eke in the same wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For both we have deserved to be slain.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This worthy Duke answér’d anon again,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And said, “This is a short conclusión.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your own mouth, by your own confessión</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath damned you, and I will it record;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It needeth not to pain you with the cord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye shall be dead, by mighty Mars the Red.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-496" id="noteref-496" epub:type="noteref">496</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The queen anon for very womanhead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began to weep, and so did Emily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the ladies in the company.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great pity was it as it thought them all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ever such a chancë should befall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For gentle men they were, of great estate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And nothing but for love was this debate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They saw their bloody woundës wide and sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cried all at once, both less and more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Have mercy, Lord, upon us women all.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on their barë knees adown they fall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And would have kiss’d his feet there as he stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till at the last aslaked was his mood<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-497" id="noteref-497" epub:type="noteref">497</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>(For pity runneth soon in gentle heart);</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though at first for ire he quoke and start,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hath consider’d shortly in a clause</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trespass of them both, and eke the cause:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And although that his ire their guilt accused,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet in his reason he them both excused;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thus; he thoughtë well that every man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will help himself in love if that he can,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eke deliver himself out of prison.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eke his heartë had compassión</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of women, for they wepten ever-in-one:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-498" id="noteref-498" epub:type="noteref">498</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in his gentle heart he thought anon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And soft unto himself he saidë: “Fie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a lord that will have no mercy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But be a lion both in word and deed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To them that be in répentance and dread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As well as to a proud dispiteous<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-499" id="noteref-499" epub:type="noteref">499</a> man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That will maintainë what he first began.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That lord hath little of discretión,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in such case can no división:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-500" id="noteref-500" epub:type="noteref">500</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>But weigheth pride and humbless after one.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-501" id="noteref-501" epub:type="noteref">501</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shortly, when his ire is thus agone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He gan to look on them with eyen light,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-502" id="noteref-502" epub:type="noteref">502</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spake these samë wordës all on height.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-503" id="noteref-503" epub:type="noteref">503</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The god of love, ah! <i xml:lang="la">benedicite</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-504" id="noteref-504" epub:type="noteref">504</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>How mighty and how great a lord is he!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against his might there gainë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-505" id="noteref-505" epub:type="noteref">505</a> none obstácles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He may be call’d a god for his mirácles.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he can maken at his owen guise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of every heart, as that him list devise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo here this Arcite, and this Palamon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That quietly were out of my prisón,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And might have lived in Thebes royally,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And weet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-506" id="noteref-506" epub:type="noteref">506</a> I am their mortal enemy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that their death li’th in my might also,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet hath love, maugré their eyen two,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-507" id="noteref-507" epub:type="noteref">507</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Y-brought them hither bothë for to die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now look ye, is not this an high folly?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who may not be a fool, if but he love?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold, for Goddë’s sake that sits above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See how they bleed! be they not well array’d?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus hath their lord, the god of love, them paid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their wages and their fees for their servíce;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet they weenë for to be full wise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That servë love, for aught that may befall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But this is yet the bestë game<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-508" id="noteref-508" epub:type="noteref">508</a> of all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That she, for whom they have this jealousy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can them therefor as muchel thank as me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She wot no more of all this hotë fare,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-509" id="noteref-509" epub:type="noteref">509</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>By God, than wot a cuckoo or an hare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all must be assayed hot or cold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A man must be a fool, or young or old;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I wot it by myself full yore agone:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-510" id="noteref-510" epub:type="noteref">510</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in my time a servant was I one.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therefore since I know of lovë’s pain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wot how sore it can a man distrain,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-511" id="noteref-511" epub:type="noteref">511</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he that oft hath been caught in his las,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-512" id="noteref-512" epub:type="noteref">512</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>I you forgivë wholly this trespáss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At réquest of the queen that kneeleth here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eke of Emily, my sister dear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ye shall both anon unto me swear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That never more ye shall my country dere,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-513" id="noteref-513" epub:type="noteref">513</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor makë war upon me night nor day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But be my friends in allë that ye may.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I you forgive this trespass every deal.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-514" id="noteref-514" epub:type="noteref">514</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And they him sware his asking<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-515" id="noteref-515" epub:type="noteref">515</a> fair and well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And him of lordship and of mercy pray’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he them granted grace, and thus he said:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“To speak of royal lineage and richéss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though that she were a queen or a princess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each of you both is worthy doubtëless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To weddë when time is; but natheless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I speak as for my sister Emily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For whom ye have this strife and jealousy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye wot yourselves, she may not wed the two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At once, although ye fight for evermo’:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But one of you, all be him loth or lief,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-516" id="noteref-516" epub:type="noteref">516</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>He must go pipe into an ivy leaf:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-517" id="noteref-517" epub:type="noteref">517</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is to say, she may not have you both,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All be ye never so jealous, nor so wroth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therefore I you put in this degree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That each of you shall have his destiny</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As him is shape;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-518" id="noteref-518" epub:type="noteref">518</a> and hearken in what wise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo hear your end of that I shall devise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My will is this, for plain conclusión</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Withouten any replicatión,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-519" id="noteref-519" epub:type="noteref">519</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>If that you liketh, take it for the best,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That evereach of you shall go where him lest,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-520" id="noteref-520" epub:type="noteref">520</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freely withoutë ransom or dangér;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this day fifty weekës, farre ne nerre,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-521" id="noteref-521" epub:type="noteref">521</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evereach of you shall bring an hundred knights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Armed for listës up at allë rights</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All ready to darraine<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-522" id="noteref-522" epub:type="noteref">522</a> her by bataille,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this behete<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-523" id="noteref-523" epub:type="noteref">523</a> I you withoutë fail</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon my troth, and as I am a knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That whether of you bothë that hath might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That is to say, that whether he or thou</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May with his hundred, as I spake of now,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slay his contráry, or out of listës drive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him shall I given Emily to wive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom that fortune gives so fair a grace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The listës shall I make here in this place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And God so wisly on my soulë rue,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-524" id="noteref-524" epub:type="noteref">524</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I shall even judgë be and true.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye shall none other endë with me maken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than one of you shallë be dead or taken.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if you thinketh this is well y-said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say your advice,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-525" id="noteref-525" epub:type="noteref">525</a> and hold yourselves apaid.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-526" id="noteref-526" epub:type="noteref">526</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is your end, and your conclusión.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who looketh lightly now but Palamon?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who springeth up for joyë but Arcite?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who could it tell, or who could it indite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The joyë that is maked in the place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Theseus hath done so fair a grace?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But down on knees went every manner<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-527" id="noteref-527" epub:type="noteref">527</a> wight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thanked him with all their heartës’ might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And namëly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-528" id="noteref-528" epub:type="noteref">528</a> these Thebans oftë sithe.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-529" id="noteref-529" epub:type="noteref">529</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus with good hope and with heartë blithe</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They take their leave, and homeward gan they ride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Thebes-ward, with his old wallës wide.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>I trow men wouldë deem it negligence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I forgot to tellë the dispence<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-530" id="noteref-530" epub:type="noteref">530</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Theseus, that went so busily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To maken up the listës royally,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That such a noble theatre as it was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I dare well say, in all this world there n’as.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-531" id="noteref-531" epub:type="noteref">531</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The circuít a milë was about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walled of stone, and ditched all without.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round was the shape, in manner of compáss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full of degrees,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-532" id="noteref-532" epub:type="noteref">532</a> the height of sixty pas,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-533" id="noteref-533" epub:type="noteref">533</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That when a man was set on one degree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He letted<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-534" id="noteref-534" epub:type="noteref">534</a> not his fellow for to see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eastward there stood a gate of marble white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Westward right such another opposite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, shortly to concludë, such a place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was never on earth made in so little space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in the land there was no craftës-man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That geometry or arsmetrikë can,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-535" id="noteref-535" epub:type="noteref">535</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor pourtrayor,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-536" id="noteref-536" epub:type="noteref">536</a> nor carver of imáges,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Theseus ne gave him meat and wages</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The theatre to make and to devise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for to do his rite and sacrifice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He eastward hath upon the gate above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In worship of Venus, goddess of love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Done<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-537" id="noteref-537" epub:type="noteref">537</a> make an altar and an oratory;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And westward, in the mind and in memory</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Mars, he maked hath right such another,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That costë largëly of gold a fother.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-538" id="noteref-538" epub:type="noteref">538</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And northward, in a turret on the wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of alabaster white and red corál</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An oratory richë for to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In worship of Diane of chastity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath Theseus done<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-539" id="noteref-539" epub:type="noteref">539</a> work in noble wise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But yet had I forgotten to devise<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-540" id="noteref-540" epub:type="noteref">540</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noble carving, and the portraitures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shape, the countenance of the figúres</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That weren in there oratories three.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>First in the temple of Venus may’st thou see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrought on the wall, full piteous to behold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The broken sleepës, and the sikës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-541" id="noteref-541" epub:type="noteref">541</a> cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sacred tearës, and the waimentings,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-542" id="noteref-542" epub:type="noteref">542</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fiery strokës of the desirings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Lovë’s servants in this life endure;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The oathës, that their covenants assure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pleasance and Hope, Desire, Foolhardiness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beauty and Youth, and Bawdry and Richéss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Charms and Sorc’ry, Leasings<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-543" id="noteref-543" epub:type="noteref">543</a> and Flattery,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dispencë, Business, and Jealousy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That wore of yellow goldës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-544" id="noteref-544" epub:type="noteref">544</a> a garland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And had a cuckoo sitting on her hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feasts, instruments, and carolës and dances,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lust and array, and all the circumstánces</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Love, which I reckon’d and reckon shall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In order, werë painted on the wall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And more than I can make of mentión.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For soothly all the mount of Citheron,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-545" id="noteref-545" epub:type="noteref">545</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Venus hath her principal dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was showed on the wall in pourtraying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all the garden, and the lustiness.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-546" id="noteref-546" epub:type="noteref">546</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor was forgot the porter Idleness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor Narcissus the fair of yore agone,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-547" id="noteref-547" epub:type="noteref">547</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor yet the folly of King Solomon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor yet the greatë strength of Hercules,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Th’ enchantments of Medea and Circés,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor of Turnus the hardy fierce couráge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The richë Croesus caitif in serváge.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-548" id="noteref-548" epub:type="noteref">548</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus may ye see, that wisdom nor richéss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beauty, nor sleight, nor strength, nor hardiness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ne may with Venus holdë champartie,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-549" id="noteref-549" epub:type="noteref">549</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For as her listë the world may she gie.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-550" id="noteref-550" epub:type="noteref">550</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo, all these folk so caught were in her las<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-551" id="noteref-551" epub:type="noteref">551</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till they for woe full often said, Alas!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sufficë these ensamples one or two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although I could reckon a thousand mo’.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The statue of Venus, glorious to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was naked floating in the largë sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the navel down all cover’d was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wavës green, and bright as any glass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A citole<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-552" id="noteref-552" epub:type="noteref">552</a> in her right hand haddë she,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on her head, full seemly for to see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A rosë garland fresh, and well smelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above her head her dovës flickering.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before her stood her sonë Cupido,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his shoulders wingës had he two;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blind he was, as it is often seen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bow he bare, and arrows bright and keen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Why should I not as well eke tell you all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The portraiture, that was upon the wall</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within the temple of mighty Mars the Red?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All painted was the wall in length and brede<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-553" id="noteref-553" epub:type="noteref">553</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like to the estres<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-554" id="noteref-554" epub:type="noteref">554</a> of the grisly place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hight the great temple of Mars in Thrace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-555" id="noteref-555" epub:type="noteref">555</a> cold and frosty región,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There as Mars hath his sovereign mansión.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First on the wall was painted a forést,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which there dwelled neither man nor beast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With knotty gnarry<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-556" id="noteref-556" epub:type="noteref">556</a> barren treës old</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of stubbës sharp and hideous to behold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which there ran a rumble and a sough,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-557" id="noteref-557" epub:type="noteref">557</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>As though a storm should bursten every bough:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And downward from an hill under a bent,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-558" id="noteref-558" epub:type="noteref">558</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>There stood the temple of Mars Armipotent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrought all of burnish’d steel, of which th’ entry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was long and strait, and ghastly for to see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thereout came a rage and such a vise,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-559" id="noteref-559" epub:type="noteref">559</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That it made all the gatës for to rise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The northern light in at the doorë shone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For window on the wallë was there none</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through which men mighten any light discern.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The doors were all of adamant etern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Y-clenched overthwart and endëlong<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-560" id="noteref-560" epub:type="noteref">560</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>With iron tough, and, for to make it strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Every pillar the temple to sustain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was tunnë-great,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-561" id="noteref-561" epub:type="noteref">561</a> of iron bright and sheen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There saw I first the dark imagining</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of felony, and all the compassing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cruel ire, as red as any glede,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-562" id="noteref-562" epub:type="noteref">562</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pickëpurse,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-563" id="noteref-563" epub:type="noteref">563</a> and eke the palë dread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The smiler with the knife under the cloak,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shepen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-564" id="noteref-564" epub:type="noteref">564</a> burning with the blackë smoke;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The treason of the murd’ring in the bed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The open war, with woundës all be-bled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conteke<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-565" id="noteref-565" epub:type="noteref">565</a> with bloody knife, and sharp menace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All full of chirking<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-566" id="noteref-566" epub:type="noteref">566</a> was that sorry place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The slayer of himself eke saw I there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His heartë-blood had bathed all his hair:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nail y-driven in the shode<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-567" id="noteref-567" epub:type="noteref">567</a> at night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The coldë death, with mouth gaping upright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amiddës of the temple sat Mischance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With discomfórt and sorry countenance;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eke saw I Woodness<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-568" id="noteref-568" epub:type="noteref">568</a> laughing in his rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Armed Complaint, Outhees,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-569" id="noteref-569" epub:type="noteref">569</a> and fierce Outrage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The carrain<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-570" id="noteref-570" epub:type="noteref">570</a> in the bush, with throat y-corve,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-571" id="noteref-571" epub:type="noteref">571</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thousand slain, and not of qualm y-storve;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-572" id="noteref-572" epub:type="noteref">572</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The tyrant, with the prey by force y-reft;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The town destroy’d, that there was nothing left.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet saw I brent the shippës hoppësteres,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-573" id="noteref-573" epub:type="noteref">573</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hunter strangled with the wildë bears:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sow freting<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-574" id="noteref-574" epub:type="noteref">574</a> the child right in the cradle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cook scalded, for all his longë ladle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor was forgot, by th’ infortune of Mart<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-575" id="noteref-575" epub:type="noteref">575</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The carter overridden with his cart;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under the wheel full low he lay adown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There were also of Mars’ division,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The armourer, the bowyer,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-576" id="noteref-576" epub:type="noteref">576</a> and the smith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That forgeth sharpë swordës on his stith.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-577" id="noteref-577" epub:type="noteref">577</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all above depainted in a tower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw I Conquest, sitting in great honoúr,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-578" id="noteref-578" epub:type="noteref">578</a> sharpë sword over his head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hanging by a subtle y-twined thread.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Painted the slaughter was of Julius,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-579" id="noteref-579" epub:type="noteref">579</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of cruel Nero, and Antonius:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although at that time they were yet unborn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet was their death depainted there beforn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By menacing of Mars, right by figúre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So was it showed in that portraitúre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As is depainted in the stars above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who shall be slain, or ellës dead for love.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sufficeth one ensample in stories old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I may not reckon them all, though I wo’ld.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The statue of Mars upon a cartë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-580" id="noteref-580" epub:type="noteref">580</a> stood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Armed, and looked grim as he were wood,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-581" id="noteref-581" epub:type="noteref">581</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And over his head there shonë two figúres</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of starrës, that be cleped in scriptures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That one Puella, that other Rubeus.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-582" id="noteref-582" epub:type="noteref">582</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>This god of armës was arrayed thus:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wolf there stood before him at his feet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With eyen red, and of a man he eat:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With subtle pencil painted was this story,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In redouting<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-583" id="noteref-583" epub:type="noteref">583</a> of Mars and of his glory.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now to the temple of Dian the chaste</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As shortly as I can I will me haste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tellë you all the descriptioun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Depainted be the wallës up and down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hunting and of shamefast chastity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There saw I how woful Calistope,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-584" id="noteref-584" epub:type="noteref">584</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>When that Dian aggrieved was with her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was turned from a woman till a bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after was she made the lodëstar:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-585" id="noteref-585" epub:type="noteref">585</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus was it painted, I can say no far;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-586" id="noteref-586" epub:type="noteref">586</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her son is eke a star as men may see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There saw I Danë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-587" id="noteref-587" epub:type="noteref">587</a> turn’d into a tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I meanë not the goddess Dianë,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Peneus’ daughter, which that hight Danë.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There saw I Actaeon an hart y-maked,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-588" id="noteref-588" epub:type="noteref">588</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For vengeance that he saw Dian all naked:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I saw how that his houndës have him caught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And freten<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-589" id="noteref-589" epub:type="noteref">589</a> him, for that they knew him not.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet painted was, a little farthermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How Atalanta hunted the wild boar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Meleager, and many other mo’,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For which Diana wrought them care and woe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There saw I many another wondrous story,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The which me list not drawen to memóry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This goddess on an hart full high was set,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-590" id="noteref-590" epub:type="noteref">590</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>With smallë houndës all about her feet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And underneath her feet she had a moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waxing it was, and shouldë wanë soon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In gaudy green her statue clothed was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With bow in hand, and arrows in a case.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-591" id="noteref-591" epub:type="noteref">591</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her eyen castë she full low adown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where Pluto hath his darkë regioun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A woman travailing was her beforn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, for her child so longë was unborn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full piteously Lucina<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-592" id="noteref-592" epub:type="noteref">592</a> gan she call,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saidë; “Help, for thou may’st best of all.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well could he paintë lifelike that it wrought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With many a florin he the hues had bought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now be these listës made, and Theseus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That at his greatë cost arrayed thus</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The temples, and the theatre every deal,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-593" id="noteref-593" epub:type="noteref">593</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>When it was done, him liked wonder well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But stint<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-594" id="noteref-594" epub:type="noteref">594</a> I will of Theseus a lite,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-595" id="noteref-595" epub:type="noteref">595</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And speak of Palamon and of Arcite.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The day approacheth of their returning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That evereach an hundred knights should bring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The battle to darraine<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-596" id="noteref-596" epub:type="noteref">596</a> as I you told;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to Athens, their covenant to hold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath ev’reach of them brought an hundred knights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well armed for the war at allë rights.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sickerly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-597" id="noteref-597" epub:type="noteref">597</a> there trowed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-598" id="noteref-598" epub:type="noteref">598</a> many a man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That never, sithen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-599" id="noteref-599" epub:type="noteref">599</a> that the world began,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For to speaken of knighthood of their hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As far as God hath maked sea and land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was, of so few, so noble a company.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-600" id="noteref-600" epub:type="noteref">600</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For every wight that loved chivalry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And would, his thankës,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-601" id="noteref-601" epub:type="noteref">601</a> have a passant<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-602" id="noteref-602" epub:type="noteref">602</a> name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had prayed, that he might be of that game,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And well was him, that thereto chosen was.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For if there fell to-morrow such a case,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye knowë well, that every lusty knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That loveth par amour, and hath his might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were it in Engleland, or ellëswhere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They would, their thankës, willen to be there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>T’ fight for a lady; <i xml:lang="la">benedicite</i>,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It were a lusty<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-603" id="noteref-603" epub:type="noteref">603</a> sightë for to see.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And right so fared they with Palamon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With him there wentë knightës many one.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some will be armed in an habergeon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in a breastplate, and in a gipon;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-604" id="noteref-604" epub:type="noteref">604</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some will have a pair of platës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-605" id="noteref-605" epub:type="noteref">605</a> large;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some will have a Prussë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-606" id="noteref-606" epub:type="noteref">606</a> shield, or targe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some will be armed on their leggës weel;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-607" id="noteref-607" epub:type="noteref">607</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some have an axe, and some a mace of steel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is no newë guise,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-608" id="noteref-608" epub:type="noteref">608</a> but it was old.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Armed they weren, as I have you told,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evereach after his opinión.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>There may’st thou see coming with Palamon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Licurgus himself, the great king of Thrace:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Black was his beard, and manly was his face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The circles of his eyen in his head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They glowed betwixtë yellow and red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And like a griffin looked he about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With kemped<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-609" id="noteref-609" epub:type="noteref">609</a> hairës on his browës stout;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His limbs were great, his brawns were hard and strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His shoulders broad, his armës round and long.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as the guisë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-610" id="noteref-610" epub:type="noteref">610</a> was in his country,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full high upon a car of gold stood he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fourë whitë bullës in the trace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Instead of coat-armour on his harness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With yellow nails, and bright as any gold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had a bearë’s skin, coal-black for old.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-611" id="noteref-611" epub:type="noteref">611</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>His long hair was y-kempt behind his back,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As any raven’s feather it shone for black.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A wreath of gold arm-great,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-612" id="noteref-612" epub:type="noteref">612</a> of hugë weight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his head sate, full of stonës bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of finë rubies and clear diamánts.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About his car there wentë white alauns,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-613" id="noteref-613" epub:type="noteref">613</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twenty and more, as great as any steer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To hunt the lion or the wildë bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And follow’d him, with muzzle fast y-bound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Collars of gold, and torettes<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-614" id="noteref-614" epub:type="noteref">614</a> filed round.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An hundred lordës had he in his rout,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-615" id="noteref-615" epub:type="noteref">615</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Armed full well, with heartës stern and stout.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With Arcita, in stories as men find,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great Emetrius the king of Ind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon a steedë bay,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-616" id="noteref-616" epub:type="noteref">616</a> trapped in steel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cover’d with cloth of gold diápred<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-617" id="noteref-617" epub:type="noteref">617</a> well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came riding like the god of armës, Mars.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His coat-armoúr was of a cloth of Tars,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-618" id="noteref-618" epub:type="noteref">618</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Couched<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-619" id="noteref-619" epub:type="noteref">619</a> with pearlës white and round and great.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His saddle was of burnish’d gold new beat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A mantëlet on his shoulders hanging</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bretful<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-620" id="noteref-620" epub:type="noteref">620</a> of rubies red, as fire sparkling.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His crispë hair like ringës was y-run,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-621" id="noteref-621" epub:type="noteref">621</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that was yellow, glittering as the sun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His nose was high, his eyen bright citrine,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-622" id="noteref-622" epub:type="noteref">622</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>His lips were round, his colour was sanguine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A fewë fracknes in his face y-sprent,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-623" id="noteref-623" epub:type="noteref">623</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betwixt yellow and black somedeal y-ment,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-624" id="noteref-624" epub:type="noteref">624</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as a lion he his looking cast.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-625" id="noteref-625" epub:type="noteref">625</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of five and twenty year his age I cast.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-626" id="noteref-626" epub:type="noteref">626</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>His beard was well begunnen for to spring;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His voice was as a trumpet thundering.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his head he wore of laurel green</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A garland fresh and lusty to be seen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his hand he bare, for his delight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An eagle tame, as any lily white.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An hundred lordës had he with him there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All armed, save their heads, in all their gear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full richëly in allë manner things.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For trust ye well, that earlës, dukes, and kings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were gather’d in this noble company,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For love, and for increase of chivalry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>About this king there ran on every part</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full many a tame lión and leopart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in this wise these lordës all and some<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-627" id="noteref-627" epub:type="noteref">627</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be on the Sunday to the city come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aboutë prime,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-628" id="noteref-628" epub:type="noteref">628</a> and in the town alight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This Theseus, this Duke, this worthy knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he had brought them into his citý,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And inned<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-629" id="noteref-629" epub:type="noteref">629</a> them, ev’reach at his degree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He feasteth them, and doth so great laboúr</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To easen them,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-630" id="noteref-630" epub:type="noteref">630</a> and do them all honoúr,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That yet men weenë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-631" id="noteref-631" epub:type="noteref">631</a> that no mannë’s wit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of none estatë could amenden<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-632" id="noteref-632" epub:type="noteref">632</a> it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The minstrelsy, the service at the feast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The greatë giftës to the most and least,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rich array of Theseus’ paláce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor who sate first or last upon the dais,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-633" id="noteref-633" epub:type="noteref">633</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>What ladies fairest be, or best dancing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or which of them can carol best or sing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or who most feelingly speaketh of love;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What hawkës sitten on the perch above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What houndës liggen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-634" id="noteref-634" epub:type="noteref">634</a> on the floor adown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all this now make I no mentioun;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But of th’ effect; that thinketh me the best;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now comes the point, and hearken if you lest.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-635" id="noteref-635" epub:type="noteref">635</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Sunday night, ere day began to spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Palamon the larkë heardë sing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Although it were not day by hourës two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet sang the lark, and Palamon right tho<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-636" id="noteref-636" epub:type="noteref">636</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>With holy heart, and with an high couráge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arose, to wenden<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-637" id="noteref-637" epub:type="noteref">637</a> on his pilgrimage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the blissful Cithera benign,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I meanë Venus, honourable and digne.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-638" id="noteref-638" epub:type="noteref">638</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in her hour<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-639" id="noteref-639" epub:type="noteref">639</a> he walketh forth a pace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the listës, where her temple was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And down he kneeleth, and with humble cheer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-640" id="noteref-640" epub:type="noteref">640</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And heartë sore, he said as ye shall hear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Fairest of fair, O lady mine Venus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Daughter to Jove, and spouse of Vulcanus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou gladder of the mount of Citheron!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-641" id="noteref-641" epub:type="noteref">641</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-642" id="noteref-642" epub:type="noteref">642</a> love thou haddest to Adon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-643" id="noteref-643" epub:type="noteref">643</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have pity on my bitter tearës’ smart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And take mine humble prayer to thine heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas! I havë no languáge to tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Th’ effectë, nor the torment of mine hell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine heartë may mine harmës not betray;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am so cónfused, that I cannot say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But mercy, lady bright, that knowest well</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My thought, and seest what harm that I feel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consider all this, and rue upon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-644" id="noteref-644" epub:type="noteref">644</a> my sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As wisly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-645" id="noteref-645" epub:type="noteref">645</a> as I shall for evermore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enforce my might, thy true servant to be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And holdë war alway with chastity:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That make I mine avow,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-646" id="noteref-646" epub:type="noteref">646</a> so ye me help.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I keepë not of armës for to yelp,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-647" id="noteref-647" epub:type="noteref">647</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor ask I not to-morrow to have victóry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor rénown in this case, nor vainë glory</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of prize of armës,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-648" id="noteref-648" epub:type="noteref">648</a> blowing up and down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I would have fully possessioun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Emily, and die in her service;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Find thou the manner how, and in what wise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I reckë not but<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-649" id="noteref-649" epub:type="noteref">649</a> it may better be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To have vict’ry of them, or they of me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that I have my lady in mine arms.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For though so be that Mars is god of arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your virtue is so great in heaven above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That, if you list, I shall well have my love.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy temple will I worship evermo’,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on thine altar, where I ride or go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will do sacrifice, and firës bete.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-650" id="noteref-650" epub:type="noteref">650</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if ye will not so, my lady sweet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then pray I you, to-morrow with a spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Arcita me through the heartë bear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then reck I not, when I have lost my life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though that Arcita win her to his wife.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is th’ effect and end of my prayére⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give me my love, thou blissful lady dear.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When th’ orison was done of Palamon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His sacrifice he did, and that anon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full piteously, with allë circumstances,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All tell I not as now<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-651" id="noteref-651" epub:type="noteref">651</a> his observánces.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But at the last the statue of Venus shook,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made a signë, whereby that he took<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-652" id="noteref-652" epub:type="noteref">652</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That his prayér accepted was that day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For though the signë shewed a delay,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-653" id="noteref-653" epub:type="noteref">653</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet wist he well that granted was his boon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with glad heart he went him home full soon.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The third hour unequál<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-654" id="noteref-654" epub:type="noteref">654</a> that Palamon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Began to Venus’ temple for to gon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up rose the sun, and up rose Emily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the temple of Dian gan hie.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her maidens, that she thither with her lad,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-655" id="noteref-655" epub:type="noteref">655</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full readily with them the fire they had,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Th’ incense, the clothës, and the remnant all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That to the sacrifice belongë shall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The hornës full of mead, as was the guise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There lacked nought to do her sacrifice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smoking<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-656" id="noteref-656" epub:type="noteref">656</a> the temple full of clothës fair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Emily with heartë debonnair<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-657" id="noteref-657" epub:type="noteref">657</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her body wash’d with water of a well.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But how she did her rite I dare not tell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-658" id="noteref-658" epub:type="noteref">658</a> it be any thing in general;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet it were a game<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-659" id="noteref-659" epub:type="noteref">659</a> to hearen all;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To him that meaneth well it were no charge:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it is good a man to be at large.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-660" id="noteref-660" epub:type="noteref">660</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her bright hair combed was, untressed all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A coronet of green oak cerrial<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-661" id="noteref-661" epub:type="noteref">661</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon her head was set full fair and meet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two firës on the altar gan she bete,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And did her thingës, as men may behold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Stace<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-662" id="noteref-662" epub:type="noteref">662</a> of Thebes, and these bookës old.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When kindled was the fire, with piteous cheer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto Dian she spake as ye may hear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O chastë goddess of the woodës green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom both heav’n and earth and sea is seen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Queen of the realm of Pluto dark and low,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goddess of maidens, that mine heart hast know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full many a year, and wost<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-663" id="noteref-663" epub:type="noteref">663</a> what I desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To keep me from the vengeance of thine ire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Actaeon aboughtë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-664" id="noteref-664" epub:type="noteref">664</a> cruelly:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chastë goddéss, well wottest thou that I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Desire to be a maiden all my life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor never will I be no love nor wife.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am, thou wost,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-665" id="noteref-665" epub:type="noteref">665</a> yet of thy company,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A maid, and love hunting and venery,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-666" id="noteref-666" epub:type="noteref">666</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And for to walken in the woodës wild,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not to be a wife, and be with child.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nought will I know the company of man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now help me, lady, since ye may and can,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For those three formës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-667" id="noteref-667" epub:type="noteref">667</a> that thou hast in thee.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Palamon, that hath such love to me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eke Arcite, that loveth me so sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This grace I prayë thee withoutë more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As sendë love and peace betwixt them two:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from me turn away their heartës so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all their hotë love, and their desire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all their busy torment, and their fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be queint,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-668" id="noteref-668" epub:type="noteref">668</a> or turn’d into another place.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if so be thou wilt do me no grace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or if my destiny be shapen so</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I shall needës have one of them two,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So send me him that most desireth me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold, goddess of cleanë chastity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The bitter tears that on my cheekës fall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since thou art maid, and keeper of us all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My maidenhead thou keep and well conserve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, while I live, a maid I will thee serve.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The firës burn upon the altar clear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While Emily was thus in her prayére:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But suddenly she saw a sightë quaint.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-669" id="noteref-669" epub:type="noteref">669</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For right anon one of the firës queint</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And quick’d<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-670" id="noteref-670" epub:type="noteref">670</a> again, and after that anon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That other fire was queint, and all agone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And as it queint, it made a whisteling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As doth a brandë wet in its burning.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at the brandës end outran anon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As it were bloody droppës many one:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For which so sore aghast was Emily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That she was well-nigh mad, and gan to cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For she ne wistë what it signified;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But onëly for fearë thus she cried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wept, that it was pity for to hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therewithal Diana gan appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With bow in hand, right as an hunteress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saidë; “Daughter, stint<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-671" id="noteref-671" epub:type="noteref">671</a> thine heaviness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Among the goddës high it is affirm’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by eternal word writ and confirm’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt be wedded unto one of tho<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-672" id="noteref-672" epub:type="noteref">672</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That have for thee so muchë care and woe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But unto which of them I may not tell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Farewell, for here I may no longer dwell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The firës which that on mine altar brenn,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-673" id="noteref-673" epub:type="noteref">673</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall thee declaren, ere that thou go henne,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-674" id="noteref-674" epub:type="noteref">674</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine áventure of love, as in this case.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with that word, the arrows in the case<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-675" id="noteref-675" epub:type="noteref">675</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the goddess did clatter fast and ring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And forth she went, and made a vanishing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For which this Emily astonied was,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And saidë; “What amounteth this,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-676" id="noteref-676" epub:type="noteref">676</a> alas!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I put me under thy protectión,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Diane, and in thy dispositión.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And home she went anon the nextë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-677" id="noteref-677" epub:type="noteref">677</a> way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is th’ effect, there is no more to say.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The nextë hour of Mars follówing this</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arcite to the temple walked is</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fiercë Mars, to do his sacrifice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all the ritës of his pagan guise.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With piteous<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-678" id="noteref-678" epub:type="noteref">678</a> heart and high devotión.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right thus to Mars he said his orison.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O strongë god, that in the regnës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-679" id="noteref-679" epub:type="noteref">679</a> cold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Thracë honoured art, and lord y-hold,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-680" id="noteref-680" epub:type="noteref">680</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hast in every regne, and every land</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of armës all the bridle in thine hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And them fortúnest as thee list devise,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-681" id="noteref-681" epub:type="noteref">681</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Accept of me my piteous sacrifice.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If so be that my youthë may deserve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that my might be worthy for to serve</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy godhead, that I may be one of thine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then pray I thee to rue upon my pine,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-682" id="noteref-682" epub:type="noteref">682</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-683" id="noteref-683" epub:type="noteref">683</a> pain, and thilkë hotë fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which thou whilom burned’st for desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whennë that thou usedest<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-684" id="noteref-684" epub:type="noteref">684</a> the beauty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of fairë youngë Venus, fresh and free,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And haddest her in armës at thy will:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though thee onës on a time misfill,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-685" id="noteref-685" epub:type="noteref">685</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Vulcanus had caught thee in his las,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-686" id="noteref-686" epub:type="noteref">686</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And found thee ligging<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-687" id="noteref-687" epub:type="noteref">687</a> by his wife, alas!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thilkë sorrow that was in thine heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have ruth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-688" id="noteref-688" epub:type="noteref">688</a> as well upon my painë’s smart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am young and unconning,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-689" id="noteref-689" epub:type="noteref">689</a> as thou know’st,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, as I trow,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-690" id="noteref-690" epub:type="noteref">690</a> with love offended most,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That e’er was any living creature:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For she, that doth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-691" id="noteref-691" epub:type="noteref">691</a> me all this woe endure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ne recketh ne’er whether I sink or fleet.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-692" id="noteref-692" epub:type="noteref">692</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And well I wot, ere she me mercy hete,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-693" id="noteref-693" epub:type="noteref">693</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>I must with strengthë win her in the place:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And well I wot, withoutë help or grace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thee, ne may my strengthë not avail:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then help me, lord, to-morr’w in my bataille,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thilkë fire that whilom burned thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As well as this fire that now burneth me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And do<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-694" id="noteref-694" epub:type="noteref">694</a> that I to-morr’w may have victóry.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine be the travail, all thine be the glory.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy sovereign temple will I most honoúr</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of any place, and alway most laboúr</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thy pleasance and in thy craftës strong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in thy temple I will my banner hong,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-695" id="noteref-695" epub:type="noteref">695</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the armës of my company,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And evermore, until that day I die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eternal fire I will before thee find.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eke to this my vow I will me bind:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My beard, my hair that hangeth long adown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That never yet hath felt offensión<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-696" id="noteref-696" epub:type="noteref">696</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of razor nor of shears, I will thee give,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And be thy truë servant while I live.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, lord, have ruth upon my sorrows sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give me the victory, I ask no more.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The prayer stint<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-697" id="noteref-697" epub:type="noteref">697</a> of Arcita the strong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ringës on the temple door that hong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eke the doorës, clattered full fast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of which Arcita somewhat was aghast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The firës burn’d upon the altar bright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That it gan all the temple for to light;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A sweetë smell anon the ground up gaf,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-698" id="noteref-698" epub:type="noteref">698</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Arcita anon his hand up haf,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-699" id="noteref-699" epub:type="noteref">699</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And more incénse into the fire he cast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With other ritës more and at the last</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The statue of Mars began his hauberk ring;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with that sound he heard a murmuring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full low and dim, that saidë thus, “Victóry.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For which he gave to Mars honour and glory.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus with joy, and hopë well to fare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arcite anon unto his inn doth fare.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As fain<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-700" id="noteref-700" epub:type="noteref">700</a> as fowl is of the brightë sun.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And right anon such strife there is begun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thilkë granting,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-701" id="noteref-701" epub:type="noteref">701</a> in the heav’n above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betwixtë Venus the goddéss of love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Mars the sternë god armipotent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Jupiter was busy it to stent:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-702" id="noteref-702" epub:type="noteref">702</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till that the palë Saturnus the cold,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-703" id="noteref-703" epub:type="noteref">703</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That knew so many of adventures old,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found in his old experience such an art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he full soon hath pleased every part.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As sooth is said, eld<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-704" id="noteref-704" epub:type="noteref">704</a> hath great advantage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In eld is bothë wisdom and uságe:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-705" id="noteref-705" epub:type="noteref">705</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men may the old out-run, but not out-rede.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-706" id="noteref-706" epub:type="noteref">706</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saturn anon, to stint the strife and drede,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Albeit that it is against his kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of all this strife gan a remédy find.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“My dearë daughter Venus,” quoth Saturn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My course,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-707" id="noteref-707" epub:type="noteref">707</a> that hath so widë for to turn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath morë power than wot any man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine is the drowning in the sea so wan;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine is the prison in the darkë cote,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-708" id="noteref-708" epub:type="noteref">708</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine the strangling and hanging by the throat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The murmur, and the churlish rebelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The groyning,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-709" id="noteref-709" epub:type="noteref">709</a> and the privy poisoning.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I do vengeance and plein<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-710" id="noteref-710" epub:type="noteref">710</a> correctión,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I dwell in the sign of the lión.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine is the ruin of the highë halls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The falling of the towers and the walls</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the miner or the carpenter:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I slew Samson in shaking the pillar:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine also be the maladiës cold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The darkë treasons, and the castës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-711" id="noteref-711" epub:type="noteref">711</a> old:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My looking is the father of pestilence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now weep no more, I shall do diligence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Palamon, that is thine owen knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall have his lady, as thou hast him hight.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-712" id="noteref-712" epub:type="noteref">712</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though Mars shall help his knight, yet natheless</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betwixtë you there must sometime be peace:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All be ye not of one complexión,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That each day causeth such división,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am thine ayel,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-713" id="noteref-713" epub:type="noteref">713</a> ready at thy will;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weep now no more, I shall thy lust<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-714" id="noteref-714" epub:type="noteref">714</a> fulfil.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now will I stenten<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-715" id="noteref-715" epub:type="noteref">715</a> of the gods above,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Mars, and of Venus, goddess of love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And tellë you as plainly as I can</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great effect, for which that I began.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Great was the feast in Athens thilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-716" id="noteref-716" epub:type="noteref">716</a> day;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eke the lusty season of that May</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made every wight to be in such pleasance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That all that Monday jousten they and dance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And spenden it in Venus’ high servíce.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But by the causë that they shouldë rise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Early a-morrow for to see that fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto their restë wentë they at night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the morrow, when the day gan spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of horse and harness<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-717" id="noteref-717" epub:type="noteref">717</a> noise and clattering</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was in the hostelries all about:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the palace rode there many a rout<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-718" id="noteref-718" epub:type="noteref">718</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of lordës, upon steedës and palfreys.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There mayst thou see devising of harness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So uncouth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-719" id="noteref-719" epub:type="noteref">719</a> and so rich, and wrought so weel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of goldsmithry, of brouding,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-720" id="noteref-720" epub:type="noteref">720</a> and of steel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shieldës bright, the testers,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-721" id="noteref-721" epub:type="noteref">721</a> and trappures;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-722" id="noteref-722" epub:type="noteref">722</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gold-hewen helmets, hauberks, coat-armures;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lordës in parements<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-723" id="noteref-723" epub:type="noteref">723</a> on their coursérs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knightës of retinue, and eke squiérs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nailing the spears, and helmës buckëling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gniding<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-724" id="noteref-724" epub:type="noteref">724</a> of shieldës, with lainers<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-725" id="noteref-725" epub:type="noteref">725</a> lacing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There as need is, they werë nothing idle:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The foamy steeds upon the golden bridle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gnawing, and fast the armourers also</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With file and hammer pricking to and fro;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yeomen on foot, and knavës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-726" id="noteref-726" epub:type="noteref">726</a> many one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With shortë stavës, thick as they may gon;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-727" id="noteref-727" epub:type="noteref">727</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pipës, trumpets, nakéres,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-728" id="noteref-728" epub:type="noteref">728</a> and clariouns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in the battle blowë bloody souns;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The palace full of people up and down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There three, there ten, holding their questioun,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-729" id="noteref-729" epub:type="noteref">729</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Divining<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-730" id="noteref-730" epub:type="noteref">730</a> of these Theban knightës two.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some saiden thus, some said it shall he so;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some helden with him with the blackë beard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some with the ballëd,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-731" id="noteref-731" epub:type="noteref">731</a> some with the thick-hair’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some said he lookëd grim, and wouldë fight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had a sparth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-732" id="noteref-732" epub:type="noteref">732</a> of twenty pound of weight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus was the hallë full of divining<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-733" id="noteref-733" epub:type="noteref">733</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long after that the sunnë gan up spring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The great Theseus that of his sleep is waked</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With minstrelsy, and noisë that was maked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held yet the chamber of his palace rich,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till that the Theban knightës both y-lich<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-734" id="noteref-734" epub:type="noteref">734</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honoúred were, and to the palace fet.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-735" id="noteref-735" epub:type="noteref">735</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Duke Theseus is at a window set,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Array’d right as he were a god in throne:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The people presseth thitherward full soon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him for to see, and do him reverence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eke to hearken his hest<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-736" id="noteref-736" epub:type="noteref">736</a> and his sentence.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-737" id="noteref-737" epub:type="noteref">737</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>An herald on a scaffold made an O,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-738" id="noteref-738" epub:type="noteref">738</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the noise of the people was y-do:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-739" id="noteref-739" epub:type="noteref">739</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when he saw the people of noise all still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus shewed he the mighty Dukë’s will.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“The lord hath of his high discretión</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Considered that it were destructión</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To gentle blood, to fighten in the guise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of mortal battle now in this emprise:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore to shapë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-740" id="noteref-740" epub:type="noteref">740</a> that they shall not die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He will his firstë purpose modify.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No man therefore, on pain of loss of life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No manner<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-741" id="noteref-741" epub:type="noteref">741</a> shot, nor poleaxe, nor short knife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the lists shall send, or thither bring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor short sword for to stick with point biting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No man shall draw, nor bear it by his side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And no man shall unto his fellow ride</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But one course, with a sharp y-grounden spear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foin<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-742" id="noteref-742" epub:type="noteref">742</a> if him list on foot, himself to wear.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-743" id="noteref-743" epub:type="noteref">743</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he that is at mischief<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-744" id="noteref-744" epub:type="noteref">744</a> shall be take,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not slain, but be brought unto the stake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That shall be ordained on either side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thither he shall by force, and there abide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if so fall<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-745" id="noteref-745" epub:type="noteref">745</a> the chiefëtain be take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On either side, or ellës slay his make,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-746" id="noteref-746" epub:type="noteref">746</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>No longer then the tourneying shall last.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God speedë you; go forth and lay on fast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With long sword and with macë fight your fill.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go now your way; this is the lordës will.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The voice of the people touched the heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So loudë criëd they with merry steven:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-747" id="noteref-747" epub:type="noteref">747</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>“God savë such a lord that is so good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He willeth no destructión of blood.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Up go the trumpets and the melody,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the listës rode the company</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By ordinance,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-748" id="noteref-748" epub:type="noteref">748</a> throughout the city large,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hanged with cloth of gold, and not with sarge.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-749" id="noteref-749" epub:type="noteref">749</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full like a lord this noble Duke gan ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And these two Thebans upon either side:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after rode the queen and Emily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after them another company</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of one and other, after their degree.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus they passed thorough that city,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the listës camë they by time:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was not of the day yet fully prime.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-750" id="noteref-750" epub:type="noteref">750</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When set was Theseus full rich and high,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hippolyta the queen, and Emily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And other ladies in their degrees about,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the seatës presseth all the rout.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And westward, through the gatës under Mart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arcite, and eke the hundred of his part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With banner red, is enter’d right anon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the selvë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-751" id="noteref-751" epub:type="noteref">751</a> moment Palamon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is, under Venus, eastward in the place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With banner white, and hardy cheer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-752" id="noteref-752" epub:type="noteref">752</a> and face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all the world, to seeken up and down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So even<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-753" id="noteref-753" epub:type="noteref">753</a> without variatioún</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There were such companiës never tway.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For there was none so wise that couldë say</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That any had of other ávantáge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of worthiness, nor of estate, nor age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So even were they chosen for to guess.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in two ranges fairë they them dress.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-754" id="noteref-754" epub:type="noteref">754</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>When that their namës read were every one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in their number guilë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-755" id="noteref-755" epub:type="noteref">755</a> were there none,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then were the gatës shut, and cried was loud;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Do now your dévoir, youngë knights proud!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The heralds left their pricking<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-756" id="noteref-756" epub:type="noteref">756</a> up and down.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now ring the trumpet loud and clarioun.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is no more to say, but east and west</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In go the spearës sadly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-757" id="noteref-757" epub:type="noteref">757</a> in the rest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In go the sharpë spurs into the side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There see me who can joust, and who can ride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There shiver shaftës upon shieldës thick;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He feeleth through the heartë-spoon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-758" id="noteref-758" epub:type="noteref">758</a> the prick.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up spring the spearës twenty foot on height;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out go the swordës as the silver bright.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The helmës they to-hewen, and to-shred;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-759" id="noteref-759" epub:type="noteref">759</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out burst the blood, with sternë streamës red.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With mighty maces the bones they to-brest.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-760" id="noteref-760" epub:type="noteref">760</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>He through the thickest of the throng gan threst.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-761" id="noteref-761" epub:type="noteref">761</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>There stumble steedës strong, and down go all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He rolleth under foot as doth a ball.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He foineth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-762" id="noteref-762" epub:type="noteref">762</a> on his foe with a trunchoun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he him hurtleth with his horse adown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He through the body hurt is, and sith take,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-763" id="noteref-763" epub:type="noteref">763</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maugré his head, and brought unto the stake,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As forword<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-764" id="noteref-764" epub:type="noteref">764</a> was, right there he must abide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another led is on that other side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sometime doth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-765" id="noteref-765" epub:type="noteref">765</a> them Theseus to rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Them to refresh, and drinken if them lest.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-766" id="noteref-766" epub:type="noteref">766</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Full oft a day have thilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-767" id="noteref-767" epub:type="noteref">767</a> Thebans two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Together met, and wrought each other woe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unhorsed hath each other of them tway.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-768" id="noteref-768" epub:type="noteref">768</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is no tiger in the vale of Galaphay,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-769" id="noteref-769" epub:type="noteref">769</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>When that her whelp is stole, when it is lite,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-770" id="noteref-770" epub:type="noteref">770</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>So cruel on the hunter, as Arcite</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For jealous heart upon this Palamon:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor in Belmarie<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-771" id="noteref-771" epub:type="noteref">771</a> there is no fell lión,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hunted is, or for his hunger wood,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-772" id="noteref-772" epub:type="noteref">772</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or for his prey desireth so the blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Palamon to slay his foe Arcite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The jealous strokes upon their helmets bite;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out runneth blood on both their sidës red,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometime an end there is of every deed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For ere the sun unto the restë went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strongë king Emetrius gan hent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-773" id="noteref-773" epub:type="noteref">773</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>This Palamon, as he fought with Arcite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And made his sword deep in his flesh to bite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by the force of twenty is he take,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unyielding, and is drawn unto the stake.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in the rescue of this Palamon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strongë king Licurgus is borne down:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And king Emetrius for all his strength</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is borne out of his saddle a sword’s length,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So hit him Palamon ere he were take:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But all for nought; he was brought to the stake:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hardy heartë might him helpë naught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He must abidë, when that he was caught,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By force, and eke by compositión.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-774" id="noteref-774" epub:type="noteref">774</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who sorroweth now but woful Palamon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That must no morë go again to fight?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And when that Theseus had seen that sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the folk that foughtë thus each one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He cried, “Ho! no more, for it is done!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will be truë judge, and not party.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arcite of Thebes shall have Emily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That by his fortune hath her fairly won.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anon there is a noise of people gone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For joy of this, so loud and high withal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It seemed that the listës shouldë fall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What can now fairë Venus do above?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What saith she now? what doth this queen of love?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But weepeth so, for wanting of her will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till that her tearës in the listës fill:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-775" id="noteref-775" epub:type="noteref">775</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>She said: “I am ashamed doubtëless.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saturnus saidë: “Daughter, hold thy peace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mars hath his will, his knight hath all his boon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And by mine head thou shalt be eased<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-776" id="noteref-776" epub:type="noteref">776</a> soon.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The trumpeters with the loud minstrelsy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The heralds, that full loudë yell and cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be in their joy for weal of Dan<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-777" id="noteref-777" epub:type="noteref">777</a> Arcite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But hearken me, and stintë noise a lite,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-778" id="noteref-778" epub:type="noteref">778</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>What a mirácle there befell anon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This fierce Arcite hath off his helm y-done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on a courser for to shew his face</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He pricketh endëlong<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-779" id="noteref-779" epub:type="noteref">779</a> the largë place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looking upward upon this Emily;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she again him cast a friendly eye</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(For women, as to speaken in commúne,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-780" id="noteref-780" epub:type="noteref">780</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>They follow all the favour of fortúne),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And was all his in cheer,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-781" id="noteref-781" epub:type="noteref">781</a> as his in heart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of the ground a fire infernal start,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Pluto sent, at réquest of Saturn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For which his horse for fear began to turn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leap aside, and founder<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-782" id="noteref-782" epub:type="noteref">782</a> as he leap:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ere that Arcite may take any keep,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-783" id="noteref-783" epub:type="noteref">783</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>He pight him on the pummel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-784" id="noteref-784" epub:type="noteref">784</a> of his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in the place he lay as he were dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His breast to-bursten with his saddle-bow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As black he lay as any coal or crow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So was the blood y-run into his face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anon he was y-borne out of the place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With heartë sore, to Theseus’ palace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then was he carven<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-785" id="noteref-785" epub:type="noteref">785</a> out of his harnéss.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in a bed y-brought full fair and blive,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-786" id="noteref-786" epub:type="noteref">786</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For he was yet in mem’ry and alive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And always crying after Emily.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Duke Theseus, with all his company,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is comë home to Athens his city,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With allë bliss and great solemnity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Albeit that this áventure was fall,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-787" id="noteref-787" epub:type="noteref">787</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wouldë not discómfortë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-788" id="noteref-788" epub:type="noteref">788</a> them all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men said eke, that Arcite should not die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He should be healed of his malady.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of another thing they were as fain,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-789" id="noteref-789" epub:type="noteref">789</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That of them allë was there no one slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-790" id="noteref-790" epub:type="noteref">790</a> were they sorely hurt, and namely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-791" id="noteref-791" epub:type="noteref">791</a> one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That with a spear was thirled<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-792" id="noteref-792" epub:type="noteref">792</a> his breast-bone.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To other woundës, and to broken arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some hadden salvës, and some hadden charms:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pharmacies of herbs, and ekë save<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-793" id="noteref-793" epub:type="noteref">793</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>They dranken, for they would their livës have.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For which this noble Duke, as he well can,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comfórteth and honoúreth every man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And madë revel all the longë night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unto the strangë lordës, as was right.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor there was holden no discomforting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But as at jousts or at a tourneying;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For soothly there was no discomfiture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For falling is not but an áventure.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-794" id="noteref-794" epub:type="noteref">794</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor to be led by force unto a stake</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unyielding, and with twenty knights y-take</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One person all alone, withouten mo’,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And harried<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-795" id="noteref-795" epub:type="noteref">795</a> forth by armës, foot, and toe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eke his steedë driven forth with staves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With footmen, bothë yeomen and eke knaves,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-796" id="noteref-796" epub:type="noteref">796</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was aretted<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-797" id="noteref-797" epub:type="noteref">797</a> him no villainy:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There may no man clepen it cowardy.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-798" id="noteref-798" epub:type="noteref">798</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For which anon Duke Theseus let cry⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-799" id="noteref-799" epub:type="noteref">799</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>To stenten<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-800" id="noteref-800" epub:type="noteref">800</a> allë rancour and envy⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gree<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-801" id="noteref-801" epub:type="noteref">801</a> as well on one side as the other,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And either side alike as other’s brother:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave them giftës after their degree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And held a feastë fully dayës three:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And conveyed the kingës worthily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of his town a journée<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-802" id="noteref-802" epub:type="noteref">802</a> largëly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And home went every man the rightë way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was no more but “Farewell, Have good day.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of this batáille I will no more indite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But speak of Palamon and of Arcite.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Swelleth the breast of Arcite and the sore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Increaseth at his heartë more and more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clotted blood, for any leachë-craft,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-803" id="noteref-803" epub:type="noteref">803</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Corrupteth and is in his bouk y-laft,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-804" id="noteref-804" epub:type="noteref">804</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That neither veinë-blood nor ventousing,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-805" id="noteref-805" epub:type="noteref">805</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor drink of herbës may be his helping.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The virtue expulsive or animal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From thilkë virtue called natural,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor may the venom voidë, nor expel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pipës of his lungs began to swell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And every lacert<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-806" id="noteref-806" epub:type="noteref">806</a> in his breast adown</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is shent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-807" id="noteref-807" epub:type="noteref">807</a> with venom and corruptioún.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him gaineth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-808" id="noteref-808" epub:type="noteref">808</a> neither, for to get his life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vomit upwárd, nor downward laxative;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All is to-bursten thilkë región;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nature hath now no dominatión.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And certainly where nature will not wirch,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-809" id="noteref-809" epub:type="noteref">809</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Farewell physíc: go bear the man to chirch.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-810" id="noteref-810" epub:type="noteref">810</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>This all and some is, Arcite must die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For which he sendeth after Emily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Palamon, that was his cousin dear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then said he thus, as ye shall after hear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Nought may the woful spirit in mine heart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Declare one point of all my sorrows’ smart</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To you, my lady, that I love the most;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I bequeath the service of my ghost<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-811" id="noteref-811" epub:type="noteref">811</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>To you aboven every creature,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since that my life ne may no longer dure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas the woe! alas, the painës strong</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I for you have suffered, and so long!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas the death! alas, mine Emily!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas departing<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-812" id="noteref-812" epub:type="noteref">812</a> of our company!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alas, mine heartë’s queen! alas, my wife!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine heartë’s lady, ender of my life!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What is this world? what askë men to have?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now with his love, now in his coldë grave</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alone, withouten any company.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Farewell, my sweet, farewell, mine Emily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And softly take me in your armës tway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For love of God, and hearken what I say.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have here with my cousin Palamon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had strife and rancour many a day agone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For love of you, and for my jealousy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Jupiter so wis my soulë gie,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-813" id="noteref-813" epub:type="noteref">813</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>To speaken of a servant properly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With allë circumstances truëly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That is to say, truth, honour, and knighthead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wisdom, humbless,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-814" id="noteref-814" epub:type="noteref">814</a> estate, and high kindred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freedom, and all that longeth to that art,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Jupiter have of my soulë part,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in this world right now I know not one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So worthy to be lov’d as Palamon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That serveth you, and will do all his life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And if that you shall ever be a wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forget not Palamon, the gentle man.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And with that word his speech to fail began.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For from his feet up to his breast was come</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The cold of death, that had him overnome.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-815" id="noteref-815" epub:type="noteref">815</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet moreover in his armës two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vital strength is lost, and all ago.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-816" id="noteref-816" epub:type="noteref">816</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only the intellect, withoutë more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That dwelled in his heartë sick and sore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gan failë, when the heartë feltë death;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dusked<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-817" id="noteref-817" epub:type="noteref">817</a> his eyen two, and fail’d his breath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But on his lady yet he cast his eye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His lastë word was; “Mercy, Emily!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His spirit changed house, and wentë there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I came never I cannot tell where.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-818" id="noteref-818" epub:type="noteref">818</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore I stent,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-819" id="noteref-819" epub:type="noteref">819</a> I am no diviníster;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-820" id="noteref-820" epub:type="noteref">820</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of soulës find I nought in this regíster.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ne me list not th’ opinions to tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of them, though that they writen where they dwell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arcite is cold, there Mars his soulë gie.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-821" id="noteref-821" epub:type="noteref">821</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now will I speakë forth of Emily.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Shriek’d Emily, and howled Palamon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Theseus his sister took anon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swooning, and bare her from the corpse away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What helpeth it to tarry forth the day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To tellë how she wept both eve and morrow?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For in such cases women have such sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When that their husbands be from them y-go,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-822" id="noteref-822" epub:type="noteref">822</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That for the morë part they sorrow so,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or ellës fall into such malady,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That at the lastë certainly they die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Infinite be the sorrows and the tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of oldë folk, and folk of tender years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In all the town, for death of this Theban:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For him there weepeth bothë child and man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So great a weeping was there none certáin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Hector was y-brought, all fresh y-slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Troy: alas! the pity that was there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scratching of cheeks, and rending eke of hair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why wouldest thou be dead?” these women cry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And haddest gold enough, and Emily.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>No manner man might gladden Theseus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saving his oldë father Egeus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That knew this worldë’s transmutatioun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he had seen it changen up and down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joy after woe, and woe after gladness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shewed him example and likeness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Right as there diëd never man,” quoth he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That he ne liv’d in earth in some degree,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-823" id="noteref-823" epub:type="noteref">823</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right so there lived never man,” he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“In all this world, that sometime be not died.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This world is but a throughfare full of woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And we be pilgrims, passing to and fro:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Death is an end of every worldly sore.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And over all this said he yet much more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To this effect, full wisely to exhort</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The people, that they should them recomfórt.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Duke Theseus, with all his busy cure,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-824" id="noteref-824" epub:type="noteref">824</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Casteth about,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-825" id="noteref-825" epub:type="noteref">825</a> where that the sepulture</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of good Arcite may best y-maked be,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eke most honourable in his degree.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at the last he took conclusión,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That there as first Arcite and Palamon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haddë for love the battle them between,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in that selvë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-826" id="noteref-826" epub:type="noteref">826</a> grovë, sweet and green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There as he had his amorous desires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His cómplaint, and for love his hotë fires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He wouldë make a fire,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-827" id="noteref-827" epub:type="noteref">827</a> in which th’ offíce</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of funeral he might all áccomplice;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let anon command<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-828" id="noteref-828" epub:type="noteref">828</a> to hack and hew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The oakës old, and lay them on a rew<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-829" id="noteref-829" epub:type="noteref">829</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>In culpons,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-830" id="noteref-830" epub:type="noteref">830</a> well arrayed for to brenne.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-831" id="noteref-831" epub:type="noteref">831</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>His officers with swiftë feet they renne<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-832" id="noteref-832" epub:type="noteref">832</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ride anon at his commandëment.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after this, Duke Theseus hath sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After a bier, and it all oversprad</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With cloth of gold, the richest that he had;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of the samë suit he clad Arcite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his handës were his glovës white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eke on his head a crown of laurel green,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in his hand a sword full bright and keen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He laid him bare the visage<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-833" id="noteref-833" epub:type="noteref">833</a> on the bier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therewith he wept, that pity was to hear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, for the people shouldë see him all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When it was day he brought them to the hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That roareth of the crying and the soun’.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-834" id="noteref-834" epub:type="noteref">834</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then came this woful Theban, Palamon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sluttery beard, and ruggy ashy hairs,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-835" id="noteref-835" epub:type="noteref">835</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>In clothës black, y-dropped all with tears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And (passing over weeping Emily)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ruefullest of all the company.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And inasmuch as<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-836" id="noteref-836" epub:type="noteref">836</a> the servíce should be</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The more noble and rich in its degree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Duke Theseus let forth three steedës bring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That trapped were in steel all glittering.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And covered with the arms of Dan Arcite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon these steedës, that were great and white,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There sattë folk, of whom one bare his shield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another his spear in his handës held;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The thirdë bare with him his bow Turkeis,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-837" id="noteref-837" epub:type="noteref">837</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of brent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-838" id="noteref-838" epub:type="noteref">838</a> gold was the case<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-839" id="noteref-839" epub:type="noteref">839</a> and the harness:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ridë forth a pace with sorrowful cheer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-840" id="noteref-840" epub:type="noteref">840</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toward the grove, as ye shall after hear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The noblest of the Greekës that there were</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon their shoulders carried the bier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With slackë pace, and eyen red and wet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throughout the city, by the master street,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-841" id="noteref-841" epub:type="noteref">841</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That spread was all with black, and wondrous high</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Right of the same is all the street y-wrie.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-842" id="noteref-842" epub:type="noteref">842</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the right hand went old Egeus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And on the other side Duke Theseus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With vessels in their hand of gold full fine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All full of honey, milk, and blood, and wine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eke Palamon, with a great company;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after that came woful Emily,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fire in hand, as was that time the guise,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-843" id="noteref-843" epub:type="noteref">843</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>To do th’ office of funeral servíce.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>High labour, and full great appareling<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-844" id="noteref-844" epub:type="noteref">844</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was at the service, and the pyre-making,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That with its greenë top the heaven raught,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-845" id="noteref-845" epub:type="noteref">845</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And twenty fathom broad its armës straught:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-846" id="noteref-846" epub:type="noteref">846</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is to say, the boughës were so broad.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of straw first there was laid many a load.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But how the pyre was maked up on height,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And eke the namës how the treës hight,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-847" id="noteref-847" epub:type="noteref">847</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>As oak, fir, birch, asp,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-848" id="noteref-848" epub:type="noteref">848</a> alder, holm, poplére,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will’w, elm, plane, ash, box, chestnut, lind,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-849" id="noteref-849" epub:type="noteref">849</a> laurére,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maple, thorn, beech, hazel, yew, whipul tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How they were fell’d, shall not be told for me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor how the goddës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-850" id="noteref-850" epub:type="noteref">850</a> rannen up and down</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disinherited of their habitatioún,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In which they wonned<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-851" id="noteref-851" epub:type="noteref">851</a> had in rest and peace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nymphës, Faunës, and Hamadryadës;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor how the beastës and the birdës all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fledden for fearë, when the wood gan fall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor how the ground aghast<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-852" id="noteref-852" epub:type="noteref">852</a> was of the light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That was not wont to see the sunnë bright;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor how the fire was couched<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-853" id="noteref-853" epub:type="noteref">853</a> first with stre,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-854" id="noteref-854" epub:type="noteref">854</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then with dry stickës cloven in three,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then with greenë wood and spicery,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-855" id="noteref-855" epub:type="noteref">855</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And then with cloth of gold and with pierrie,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-856" id="noteref-856" epub:type="noteref">856</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And garlands hanging with full many a flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The myrrh, the incense with so sweet odoúr;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor how Arcita lay among all this,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor what richéss about his body is;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor how that Emily, as was the guise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put in<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-857" id="noteref-857" epub:type="noteref">857</a> the fire of funeral servíce;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor how she swooned when she made the fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor what she spake, nor what was her desire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor what jewels men in the fire then cast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When that the fire was great and burned fast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor how some cast their shield, and some their spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of their vestiments, which that they wear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cuppës full of wine, and milk, and blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into the fire, that burnt as it were wood;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-858" id="noteref-858" epub:type="noteref">858</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor how the Greekës with a hugë rout<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-859" id="noteref-859" epub:type="noteref">859</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three timës riden all the fire about</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon the left hand, with a loud shouting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thriës with their spearës clattering;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thriës how the ladies gan to cry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor how that led was homeward Emily;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor how Arcite is burnt to ashes cold;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor how the lykë-wakë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-860" id="noteref-860" epub:type="noteref">860</a> was y-hold</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All thilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-861" id="noteref-861" epub:type="noteref">861</a> night, nor how the Greekës play</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wakë-plays,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-862" id="noteref-862" epub:type="noteref">862</a> ne keep<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-863" id="noteref-863" epub:type="noteref">863</a> I not to say:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who wrestled best naked, with oil anoint,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor who that bare him best in no disjoint.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-864" id="noteref-864" epub:type="noteref">864</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will not tell eke how they all are gone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Home to Athenës when the play is done;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But shortly to the point now will I wend,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-865" id="noteref-865" epub:type="noteref">865</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And maken of my longë tale an end.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>By process and by length of certain years</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All stinted<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-866" id="noteref-866" epub:type="noteref">866</a> is the mourning and the tears</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Greekës, by one general assent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then seemed me there was a parlement<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-867" id="noteref-867" epub:type="noteref">867</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Athens, upon certain points and cas:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-868" id="noteref-868" epub:type="noteref">868</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amongës the which points y-spoken was</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To have with certain countries álliánce,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And have of Thebans full obeisánce.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For which this noble Theseus anon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-869" id="noteref-869" epub:type="noteref">869</a> send after the gentle Palamon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unwist<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-870" id="noteref-870" epub:type="noteref">870</a> of him what was the cause and why:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in his blackë clothes sorrowfully</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He came at his commandment on hie;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-871" id="noteref-871" epub:type="noteref">871</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then sentë Theseus for Emily.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When they were set,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-872" id="noteref-872" epub:type="noteref">872</a> and hush’d was all the place</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Theseus abided<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-873" id="noteref-873" epub:type="noteref">873</a> had a space</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere any word came from his wisë breast</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His eyen set he there as was his lest,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-874" id="noteref-874" epub:type="noteref">874</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with a sad viságe he sighed still,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And after that right thus he said his will.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“The firstë mover of the cause above</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he first made the fairë chain of love,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great was th’ effect, and high was his intent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well wist he why, and what thereof he meant:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For with that fairë chain of love he bond<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-875" id="noteref-875" epub:type="noteref">875</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fire, the air, the water, and the lond</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In certain bondës, that they may not flee:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-876" id="noteref-876" epub:type="noteref">876</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That samë prince and mover eke,” quoth he,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hath stablish’d, in this wretched world adown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Certain of dayës and duratión</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To all that are engender’d in this place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over the whichë day they may not pace,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-877" id="noteref-877" epub:type="noteref">877</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>All<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-878" id="noteref-878" epub:type="noteref">878</a> may they yet their dayës well abridge.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There needeth no authority to allëge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For it is proved by experience;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But that me list declarë my senténce.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-879" id="noteref-879" epub:type="noteref">879</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then may men by this order well discern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-880" id="noteref-880" epub:type="noteref">880</a> mover stable is and etern.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well may men know, but that it be a fool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That every part deriveth from its whole.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For nature hath not ta’en its beginning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of no partie nor cantle<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-881" id="noteref-881" epub:type="noteref">881</a> of a thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But of a thing that perfect is and stable,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Descending so, till it be corruptáble.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And therefore of his wisë purveyance<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-882" id="noteref-882" epub:type="noteref">882</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>He hath so well beset<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-883" id="noteref-883" epub:type="noteref">883</a> his ordinance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That species of things and progressións</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shallen endurë by successións,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not etern, withouten any lie:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This mayst thou understand and see at eye.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo th’ oak, that hath so long a nourishing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the time that it ’ginneth first to spring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hath so long a life, as ye may see,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet at the last y-wasted is the tree.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Consider eke, how that the hardë stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under our feet, on which we tread and gon,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-884" id="noteref-884" epub:type="noteref">884</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet wasteth, as it lieth by the way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The broadë river some time waxeth drey.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-885" id="noteref-885" epub:type="noteref">885</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>The greatë townës see we wane and wend.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-886" id="noteref-886" epub:type="noteref">886</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then may ye see that all things have an end.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of man and woman see we well also,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That needës in one of the termës two⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That is to say, in youth or else in age⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He must be dead, the king as shall a page;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some in his bed, some in the deepë sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some in the largë field, as ye may see:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There helpeth nought, all go that ilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-887" id="noteref-887" epub:type="noteref">887</a> way:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then may I say that allë thing must die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What maketh this but Jupiter the king?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The which is prince, and cause of allë thing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Converting all unto his proper will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From which it is derived, sooth to tell</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hereagainst no creature alive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of no degree, availeth for to strive.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then is it wisdom, as it thinketh me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To make a virtue of necessity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And take it well, that we may not eschew,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-888" id="noteref-888" epub:type="noteref">888</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And namëly what to us all is due.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And whoso grudgeth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-889" id="noteref-889" epub:type="noteref">889</a> ought, he doth folly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rebel is to him that all may gie.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-890" id="noteref-890" epub:type="noteref">890</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And certainly a man hath most honoúr</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To dien in his excellence and flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he is sicker<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-891" id="noteref-891" epub:type="noteref">891</a> of his goodë name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then hath he done his friend, nor him,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-892" id="noteref-892" epub:type="noteref">892</a> no shame</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gladder ought his friend be of his death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When with honoúr is yielded up his breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than when his name appalled is for age;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-893" id="noteref-893" epub:type="noteref">893</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For all forgotten is his vassalage.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-894" id="noteref-894" epub:type="noteref">894</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then is it best, as for a worthy fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To dien when a man is best of name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The contrary of all this is wilfulness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why grudgë we, why have we heaviness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That good Arcite, of chivalry the flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Departed is, with duty and honoúr,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of this foulë prison of this life?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why grudgë here his cousin and his wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his welfare, that loved him so well?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can he them thank?⁠—nay, God wot, never a deal⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-895" id="noteref-895" epub:type="noteref">895</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>That both his soul and eke themselves offend,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-896" id="noteref-896" epub:type="noteref">896</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet they may their lustës not amend.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-897" id="noteref-897" epub:type="noteref">897</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>What may I cónclude of this longë série,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-898" id="noteref-898" epub:type="noteref">898</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>But after sorrow I rede<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-899" id="noteref-899" epub:type="noteref">899</a> us to be merry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thankë Jupiter for all his grace?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ere that we departë from this place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I redë that we make of sorrows two</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One perfect joyë lasting evermo’:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And look now where most sorrow is herein,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There will I first amenden and begin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sister,” quoth he, “this is my full assent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With all th’ advice here of my parlement,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That gentle Palamon, your owen knight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That serveth you with will, and heart, and might,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ever hath, since first time ye him knew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That ye shall of your grace upon him rue,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-900" id="noteref-900" epub:type="noteref">900</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And take him for your husband and your lord:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lend me your hand, for this is our accord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let see<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-901" id="noteref-901" epub:type="noteref">901</a> now of your womanly pity.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He is a kingë’s brother’s son, pardie.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-902" id="noteref-902" epub:type="noteref">902</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And though he were a poorë bachelére,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since he hath served you so many a year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And had for you so great adversity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It mustë be considered, ’lieveth me.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-903" id="noteref-903" epub:type="noteref">903</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>For gentle mercy oweth to passen right.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-904" id="noteref-904" epub:type="noteref">904</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then said he thus to Palamon the knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I trow there needeth little sermoning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To makë you assentë to this thing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come near, and take your lady by the hand.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Betwixtë them was made anon the band,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hight matrimony or marriáge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By all the counsel of the baronage.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus with allë bliss and melody</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hath Palamon y-wedded Emily.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And God, that all this widë world hath wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Send him his love, that hath it dearly bought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For now is Palamon in all his weal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Living in bliss, in riches, and in heal;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-905" id="noteref-905" epub:type="noteref">905</a></span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Emily him loves so tenderly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he her serveth all so gentilly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That never was there wordë them between</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of jealousy, nor of none other teen.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-906" id="noteref-906" epub:type="noteref">906</a></span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus endeth Palamon and Emily</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And God save all this fairë company.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
