<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Miller’s Tale</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:poem">
		<section id="the-millers-tale" epub:type="division">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Miller’s Tale</h2>
			<section id="the-millers-tale-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Prologue</h3>
				<p>
					<span>When that the Knight had thus his tale told</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all the rout was neither young nor old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he not said it was a noble story,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And worthy to be *drawen to memory*; *recorded*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And *namely the gentles* every one. *especially the gentlefolk*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our Host then laugh'd and swore, "So may I gon,* *prosper</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This goes aright; *unbuckled is the mail;* *the budget is opened*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let see now who shall tell another tale:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For truely this game is well begun.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now telleth ye, Sir Monk, if that ye conne*, *know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Somewhat, to quiten* with the Knighte's tale." *match</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Miller that fordrunken was all pale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that unnethes* upon his horse he sat, *with difficulty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would avalen* neither hood nor hat, *uncover</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor abide* no man for his courtesy, *give way to</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in Pilate's voice&lt;1&gt; he gan to cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And swore by armes, and by blood, and bones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"I can a noble tale for the nones* *occasion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which I will now quite* the Knighte's tale." *match</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our Host saw well how drunk he was of ale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said; "Robin, abide, my leve* brother, *dear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some better man shall tell us first another:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abide, and let us worke thriftily."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Godde's soul," quoth he, "that will not I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I will speak, or elles go my way!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our Host answer'd; "*Tell on a devil way*; *devil take you!*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art a fool; thy wit is overcome."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Now hearken," quoth the Miller, "all and some:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But first I make a protestatioun.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I am drunk, I know it by my soun':</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore if that I misspeak or say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>*Wite it* the ale of Southwark, I you pray: *blame it on*&lt;2&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I will tell a legend and a life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both of a carpenter and of his wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How that a clerk hath *set the wrighte's cap*." *fooled the carpenter*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Reeve answer'd and saide, "*Stint thy clap*, *hold your tongue*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let be thy lewed drunken harlotry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is a sin, and eke a great folly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To apeiren* any man, or him defame, *injure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke to bringe wives in evil name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou may'st enough of other thinges sayn."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This drunken Miller spake full soon again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saide, "Leve brother Osewold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who hath no wife, he is no cuckold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I say not therefore that thou art one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There be full goode wives many one.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why art thou angry with my tale now?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have a wife, pardie, as well as thou,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet *n'old I*, for the oxen in my plough, *I would not*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Taken upon me more than enough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To deemen* of myself that I am one; *judge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will believe well that I am none.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An husband should not be inquisitive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Godde's privity, nor of his wife.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So he may finde Godde's foison* there, *treasure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the remnant needeth not to enquere."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>What should I more say, but that this Millere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would his wordes for no man forbear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But told his churlish* tale in his mannere; *boorish, rude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me thinketh, that I shall rehearse it here.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore every gentle wight I pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Godde's love to deem not that I say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of evil intent, but that I must rehearse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their tales all, be they better or worse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or elles falsen* some of my mattere. *falsify</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore whoso list it not to hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turn o'er the leaf, and choose another tale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he shall find enough, both great and smale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of storial* thing that toucheth gentiless, *historical, true</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke morality and holiness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blame not me, if that ye choose amiss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Miller is a churl, ye know well this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So was the Reeve, with many other mo',</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And harlotry* they tolde bothe two. *ribald tales</span>
					<br/>
					<span>*Avise you* now, and put me out of blame; *be warned*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke men should not make earnest of game*. *jest, fun</span>
				</p>
				<p>Notes to the Prologue to the Miller's Tale</p>
				<p>1. Pilate, an unpopular personage in the mystery-plays of the middle ages, was probably represented as having a gruff, harsh voice.</p>
				<p>2. Wite: blame; in Scotland, "to bear the wyte," is to bear the blame.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-millers-tale-main" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Tale</h3>
				<p>
					<span>Whilom there was dwelling in Oxenford</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A riche gnof*, that *guestes held to board*, *miser *took in boarders*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of his craft he was a carpenter.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With him there was dwelling a poor scholer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had learned art, but all his fantasy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was turned for to learn astrology.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He coude* a certain of conclusions *knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To deeme* by interrogations, *determine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that men asked him in certain hours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that men should have drought or elles show'rs:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or if men asked him what shoulde fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of everything, I may not reckon all.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This clerk was called Hendy* Nicholas; *gentle, handsome</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of derne* love he knew and of solace; *secret, earnest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therewith he was sly and full privy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And like a maiden meek for to see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A chamber had he in that hostelry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone, withouten any company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full *fetisly y-dight* with herbes swoot*, *neatly decorated*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he himself was sweet as is the root *sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of liquorice, or any setewall*. *valerian</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His Almagest,&lt;1&gt; and bookes great and small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His astrolabe,&lt;2&gt; belonging to his art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His augrim stones,&lt;3&gt; layed fair apart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On shelves couched* at his bedde's head, *laid, set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His press y-cover'd with a falding* red. *coarse cloth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all above there lay a gay psalt'ry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On which he made at nightes melody,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So sweetely, that all the chamber rang:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Angelus ad virginem&lt;4&gt; he sang.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after that he sung the kinge's note;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full often blessed was his merry throat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus this sweete clerk his time spent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After *his friendes finding and his rent.* *Attending to his friends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>and providing for the</span>
					<br/>
					<span>cost of his lodging*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This carpenter had wedded new a wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which that he loved more than his life:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of eighteen year, I guess, she was of age.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jealous he was, and held her narr'w in cage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she was wild and young, and he was old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And deemed himself belike* a cuckold. *perhaps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He knew not Cato,&lt;5&gt; for his wit was rude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That bade a man wed his similitude.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men shoulde wedden after their estate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For youth and eld* are often at debate. *age</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But since that he was fallen in the snare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He must endure (as other folk) his care.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair was this younge wife, and therewithal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As any weasel her body gent* and small. *slim, neat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A seint* she weared, barred all of silk, *girdle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A barm-cloth* eke as white as morning milk *apron&lt;6&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon her lendes*, full of many a gore**. *loins **plait</span>
					<br/>
					<span>White was her smock*, and broider'd all before, *robe or gown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke behind, on her collar about</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of coal-black silk, within and eke without.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tapes of her white volupere* *head-kerchief &lt;7&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were of the same suit of her collere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her fillet broad of silk, and set full high:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sickerly* she had a likerous** eye. *certainly **lascivious</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full small y-pulled were her browes two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they were bent*, and black as any sloe. *arched</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was well more *blissful on to see* *pleasant to look upon*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than is the newe perjenete* tree; *young pear-tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And softer than the wool is of a wether.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by her girdle hung a purse of leather,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tassel'd with silk, and *pearled with latoun*. *set with brass pearls*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all this world to seeken up and down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no man so wise, that coude thenche* *fancy, think of</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So gay a popelot*, or such a wench. *puppet &lt;8&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full brighter was the shining of her hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than in the Tower the noble* forged new. *a gold coin &lt;9&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But of her song, it was as loud and yern*, *lively &lt;10&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As any swallow chittering on a bern*. *barn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereto* she coulde skip, and *make a game* *also *romp*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As any kid or calf following his dame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her mouth was sweet as braket,&lt;11&gt; or as methe* *mead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or hoard of apples, laid in hay or heath.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wincing* she was as is a jolly colt, *skittish</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long as a mast, and upright as a bolt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A brooch she bare upon her low collere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As broad as is the boss of a bucklere.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her shoon were laced on her legges high;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was a primerole,* a piggesnie &lt;12&gt;, *primrose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For any lord t' have ligging* in his bed, *lying</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or yet for any good yeoman to wed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now, sir, and eft* sir, so befell the case, *again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That on a day this Hendy Nicholas</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fell with this younge wife to rage* and play, *toy, play the rogue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While that her husband was at Oseney,&lt;13&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As clerkes be full subtle and full quaint.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And privily he caught her by the queint,* *cunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said; "Y-wis,* but if I have my will, *assuredly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For *derne love of thee, leman, I spill."* *for earnest love of thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And helde her fast by the haunche bones, my mistress, I perish*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saide "Leman, love me well at once,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or I will dien, all so God me save."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she sprang as a colt doth in the trave&lt;14&gt;:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with her head she writhed fast away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said; "I will not kiss thee, by my fay*. *faith</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why let be," quoth she, "let be, Nicholas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or I will cry out harow and alas!&lt;15&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do away your handes, for your courtesy."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Nicholas gan mercy for to cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And spake so fair, and proffer'd him so fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she her love him granted at the last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And swore her oath by Saint Thomas of Kent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she would be at his commandement,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that she may her leisure well espy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"My husband is so full of jealousy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That but* ye waite well, and be privy, *unless</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wot right well I am but dead," quoth she.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Ye muste be full derne* as in this case." *secret</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Nay, thereof care thee nought," quoth Nicholas:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"A clerk had *litherly beset his while*, *ill spent his time*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>*But if* he could a carpenter beguile." *unless</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus they were accorded and y-sworn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wait a time, as I have said beforn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Nicholas had done thus every deal*, *whit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thwacked her about the lendes* well, *loins</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He kiss'd her sweet, and taketh his psalt'ry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And playeth fast, and maketh melody.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then fell it thus, that to the parish church,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Christe's owen workes for to wirch*, *work</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This good wife went upon a holy day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her forehead shone as bright as any day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So was it washen, when she left her werk.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now was there of that church a parish clerk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which that was y-cleped Absolon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Curl'd was his hair, and as the gold it shone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And strutted* as a fanne large and broad; *stretched</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full straight and even lay his jolly shode*. *head of hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His rode* was red, his eyen grey as goose, *complexion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Paule's windows carven on his shoes &lt;16&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In hosen red he went full fetisly*. *daintily, neatly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Y-clad he was full small and properly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All in a kirtle* of a light waget*; *girdle **sky blue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full fair and thicke be the pointes set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thereupon he had a gay surplice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As white as is the blossom on the rise*. *twig &lt;17&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A merry child he was, so God me save;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well could he letten blood, and clip, and shave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make a charter of land, and a quittance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In twenty manners could he trip and dance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the school of Oxenforde tho*,&lt;18&gt; *then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with his legges caste to and fro;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And playen songes on a small ribible*; *fiddle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereto he sung sometimes a loud quinible* *treble</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as well could he play on a gitern.* *guitar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all the town was brewhouse nor tavern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he not visited with his solas*, *mirth, sport</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There as that any *garnard tapstere* was. *licentious barmaid*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But sooth to say he was somedeal squaimous* *squeamish</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of farting, and of speeche dangerous.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Absolon, that jolly was and gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Went with a censer on the holy day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Censing* the wives of the parish fast; *burning incense for</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many a lovely look he on them cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And namely* on this carpenter's wife: *especially</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To look on her him thought a merry life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was so proper, and sweet, and likerous.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I dare well say, if she had been a mouse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he a cat, he would *her hent anon*. *have soon caught her*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This parish clerk, this jolly Absolon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath in his hearte such a love-longing!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of no wife took he none offering;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For courtesy he said he woulde none.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The moon at night full clear and brighte shone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Absolon his gitern hath y-taken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For paramours he thoughte for to waken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And forth he went, jolif* and amorous, *joyous</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till he came to the carpentere's house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little after the cock had y-crow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And *dressed him* under a shot window &lt;19&gt;, *stationed himself.*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was upon the carpentere's wall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He singeth in his voice gentle and small;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Now, dear lady, if thy will be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray that ye will rue* on me;" *take pity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full well accordant to his giterning.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This carpenter awoke, and heard him sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And spake unto his wife, and said anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What Alison, hear'st thou not Absolon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That chanteth thus under our bower* wall?" *chamber</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she answer'd her husband therewithal;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Yes, God wot, John, I hear him every deal."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This passeth forth; what will ye bet* than well? *better</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>From day to day this jolly Absolon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So wooeth her, that him is woebegone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He waketh all the night, and all the day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To comb his lockes broad, and make him gay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wooeth her *by means and by brocage*, *by presents and by agents*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And swore he woulde be her owen page.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He singeth brokking* as a nightingale. *quavering</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sent her piment &lt;20&gt;, mead, and spiced ale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wafers* piping hot out of the glede**: *cakes **coals</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, for she was of town, he proffer'd meed.&lt;21&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For some folk will be wonnen for richess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And some for strokes, and some with gentiless.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes, to show his lightness and mast'ry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He playeth Herod &lt;22&gt; on a scaffold high.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what availeth him as in this case?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So loveth she the Hendy Nicholas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Absolon may *blow the bucke's horn*: *"go whistle"*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had for all his labour but a scorn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus she maketh Absolon her ape,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all his earnest turneth to a jape*. *jest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full sooth is this proverb, it is no lie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men say right thus alway; the nighe sly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Maketh oft time the far lief to be loth. &lt;23&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For though that Absolon be wood* or wroth *mad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because that he far was from her sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This nigh Nicholas stood still in his light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now bear thee well, thou Hendy Nicholas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Absolon may wail and sing "Alas!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And so befell, that on a Saturday</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This carpenter was gone to Oseney,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Hendy Nicholas and Alison</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Accorded were to this conclusion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Nicholas shall *shape him a wile* *devise a stratagem*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silly jealous husband to beguile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if so were the game went aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She shoulde sleepen in his arms all night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For this was her desire and his also.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And right anon, withoute wordes mo',</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Nicholas no longer would he tarry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But doth full soft unto his chamber carry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both meat and drinke for a day or tway.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to her husband bade her for to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that he asked after Nicholas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She shoulde say, "She wist* not where he was; *knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the day she saw him not with eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She trowed* he was in some malady, *believed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For no cry that her maiden could him call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would answer, for nought that might befall."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus passed forth all thilke* Saturday, *that</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Nicholas still in his chamber lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ate, and slept, and didde what him list</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till Sunday, that* the sunne went to rest. *when</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This silly carpenter *had great marvaill* *wondered greatly*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Nicholas, or what thing might him ail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said; "I am adrad*, by Saint Thomas! *afraid, in dread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It standeth not aright with Nicholas:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>*God shielde* that he died suddenly. *heaven forbid!*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This world is now full fickle sickerly*. *certainly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw to-day a corpse y-borne to chirch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That now on Monday last I saw him wirch*. *work</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Go up," quod he unto his knave*, "anon; *servant.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clepe* at his door, or knocke with a stone: *call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look how it is, and tell me boldely."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This knave went him up full sturdily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, at the chamber door while that he stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He cried and knocked as that he were wood:* *mad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"What how? what do ye, Master Nicholay?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How may ye sleepen all the longe day?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all for nought, he hearde not a word.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An hole he found full low upon the board,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where as the cat was wont in for to creep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at that hole he looked in full deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the last he had of him a sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Nicholas sat ever gaping upright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he had kyked* on the newe moon. *looked &lt;24&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adown he went, and told his master soon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In what array he saw this ilke* man. *same</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This carpenter to *blissen him* began, *bless, cross himself*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said: "Now help us, Sainte Frideswide.&lt;25&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A man wot* little what shall him betide. *knows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This man is fall'n with his astronomy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into some woodness* or some agony. *madness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I thought aye well how that it shoulde be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men should know nought of Godde's privity*. *secrets</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea, blessed be alway a lewed* man, *unlearned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That *nought but only his believe can*. *knows no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So far'd another clerk with astronomy: than his "credo."*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He walked in the fieldes for to *pry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon* the starres, what there should befall, *keep watch on*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till he was in a marle pit y-fall.&lt;26&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw not that. But yet, by Saint Thomas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>*Me rueth sore of* Hendy Nicholas: *I am very sorry for*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shall be *rated of* his studying, *chidden for*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that I may, by Jesus, heaven's king!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Get me a staff, that I may underspore* *lever up</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While that thou, Robin, heavest off the door:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shall out of his studying, as I guess."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the chamber door he gan him dress* *apply himself.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His knave was a strong carl for the nonce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by the hasp he heav'd it off at once;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the floor the door fell down anon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Nicholas sat aye as still as stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever he gap'd upward into the air.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The carpenter ween'd* he were in despair, *thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hent* him by the shoulders mightily, *caught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shook him hard, and cried spitously;* *angrily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"What, Nicholas? what how, man? look adown:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awake, and think on Christe's passioun.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I crouche thee&lt;27&gt; from elves, and from wights*. *witches</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therewith the night-spell said he anon rights*, *properly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the four halves* of the house about, *corners</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the threshold of the door without.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Lord Jesus Christ, and Sainte Benedight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blesse this house from every wicked wight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the night mare, the white Pater-noster;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where wonnest* thou now, Sainte Peter's sister?" *dwellest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the last this Hendy Nicholas</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gan for to sigh full sore, and said; "Alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall all time world be lost eftsoones* now?" *forthwith</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This carpenter answer'd; "What sayest thou?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What? think on God, as we do, men that swink.*" *labour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Nicholas answer'd; "Fetch me a drink;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after will I speak in privity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of certain thing that toucheth thee and me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will tell it no other man certain."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This carpenter went down, and came again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And brought of mighty ale a large quart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when that each of them had drunk his part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Nicholas his chamber door fast shet*, *shut</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And down the carpenter by him he set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saide; "John, mine host full lief* and dear, *loved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt upon thy truthe swear me here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That to no wight thou shalt my counsel wray*: *betray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For it is Christes counsel that I say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if thou tell it man, thou art forlore:* *lost&lt;28&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For this vengeance thou shalt have therefor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That if thou wraye* me, thou shalt be wood**." *betray **mad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Nay, Christ forbid it for his holy blood!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quoth then this silly man; "I am no blab,* *talker</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor, though I say it, am I *lief to gab*. *fond of speech*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say what thou wilt, I shall it never tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To child or wife, by him that harried Hell." &lt;29&gt;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>"Now, John," quoth Nicholas, "I will not lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have y-found in my astrology,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I have looked in the moone bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That now on Monday next, at quarter night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall fall a rain, and that so wild and wood*, *mad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That never half so great was Noe's flood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This world," he said, "in less than half an hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall all be dreint*, so hideous is the shower: *drowned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus shall mankinde drench*, and lose their life." *drown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This carpenter answer'd; "Alas, my wife!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shall she drench? alas, mine Alisoun!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For sorrow of this he fell almost adown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said; "Is there no remedy in this case?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Why, yes, for God," quoth Hendy Nicholas;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"If thou wilt worken after *lore and rede*; *learning and advice*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou may'st not worken after thine own head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thus saith Solomon, that was full true:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Work all by counsel, and thou shalt not rue*. *repent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if thou worke wilt by good counseil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I undertake, withoute mast or sail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet shall I save her, and thee, and me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hast thou not heard how saved was Noe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that our Lord had warned him beforn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all the world with water *should be lorn*?" *should perish*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Yes," quoth this carpenter," *full yore ago*." *long since*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Hast thou not heard," quoth Nicholas, "also</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sorrow of Noe, with his fellowship,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he had ere he got his wife to ship?&lt;30&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>*Him had been lever, I dare well undertake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At thilke time, than all his wethers black,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she had had a ship herself alone.* *see note &lt;31&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore know'st thou what is best to be done?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This asketh haste, and of an hasty thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men may not preach or make tarrying.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon go get us fast into this inn* *house</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A kneading trough, or else a kemelin*, *brewing-tub</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For each of us; but look that they be large,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In whiche we may swim* as in a barge: *float</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And have therein vitaille suffisant</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for one day; fie on the remenant;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The water shall aslake* and go away *slacken, abate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aboute prime* upon the nexte day. *early morning</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Robin may not know of this, thy knave*, *servant</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor eke thy maiden Gill I may not save:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ask me not why: for though thou aske me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will not telle Godde's privity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sufficeth thee, *but if thy wit be mad*, *unless thou be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To have as great a grace as Noe had; out of thy wits*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy wife shall I well saven out of doubt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go now thy way, and speed thee hereabout.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when thou hast for her, and thee, and me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Y-gotten us these kneading tubbes three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then shalt thou hang them in the roof full high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that no man our purveyance* espy: *foresight, providence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when thou hast done thus as I have said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hast our vitaille fair in them y-laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke an axe to smite the cord in two</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that the water comes, that we may go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And break an hole on high upon the gable</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the garden-ward, over the stable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That we may freely passe forth our way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that the greate shower is gone away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then shalt thou swim as merry, I undertake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As doth the white duck after her drake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then will I clepe,* 'How, Alison? How, John? *call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be merry: for the flood will pass anon.'</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thou wilt say, 'Hail, Master Nicholay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good-morrow, I see thee well, for it is day.'</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then shall we be lordes all our life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the world, as Noe and his wife.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But of one thing I warne thee full right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be well advised, on that ilke* night, *same</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When we be enter'd into shippe's board,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That none of us not speak a single word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor clepe nor cry, but be in his prayere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that is Godde's owen heste* dear. *command</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy wife and thou must hangen far atween*, *asunder</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that betwixte you shall be no sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more in looking than there shall in deed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This ordinance is said: go, God thee speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-morrow night, when men be all asleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into our kneading tubbes will we creep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sitte there, abiding Godde's grace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go now thy way, I have no longer space</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make of this no longer sermoning:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men say thus: Send the wise, and say nothing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art so wise, it needeth thee nought teach.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go, save our lives, and that I thee beseech."</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This silly carpenter went forth his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full oft he said, "Alas! and Well-a-day!,'</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to his wife he told his privity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she was ware, and better knew than he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What all this *quainte cast was for to say*. *strange contrivance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But natheless she fear'd as she would dey, meant*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said: "Alas! go forth thy way anon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Help us to scape, or we be dead each one.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am thy true and very wedded wife;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go, deare spouse, and help to save our life."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, what a great thing is affection!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men may die of imagination,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So deeply may impression be take.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This silly carpenter begins to quake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He thinketh verily that he may see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This newe flood come weltering as the sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To drenchen* Alison, his honey dear. *drown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He weepeth, waileth, maketh *sorry cheer*; *dismal countenance*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sigheth, with full many a sorry sough.* *groan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He go'th, and getteth him a kneading trough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after that a tub, and a kemelin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And privily he sent them to his inn:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hung them in the roof full privily.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his own hand then made he ladders three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To climbe by *the ranges and the stalks* *the rungs and the uprights*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the tubbes hanging in the balks*; *beams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And victualed them, kemelin, trough, and tub,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With bread and cheese, and good ale in a jub*, *jug</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sufficing right enough as for a day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ere that he had made all this array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sent his knave*, and eke his wench** also, *servant **maid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his need* to London for to go. *business</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the Monday, when it drew to night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shut his door withoute candle light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dressed* every thing as it should be. *prepared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shortly up they climbed all the three.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They satte stille well *a furlong way*. *the time it would take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Now, Pater noster, clum,"&lt;32&gt; said Nicholay, to walk a furlong*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And "clum," quoth John; and "clum," said Alison:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This carpenter said his devotion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still he sat and bidded his prayere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awaking on the rain, if he it hear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The deade sleep, for weary business,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fell on this carpenter, right as I guess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About the curfew-time,&lt;33&gt; or little more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For *travail of his ghost* he groaned sore, *anguish of spirit*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>*And eft he routed, for his head mislay.* *and then he snored,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adown the ladder stalked Nicholay; for his head lay awry*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Alison full soft adown she sped.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Withoute wordes more they went to bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>*There as* the carpenter was wont to lie: *where*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was the revel, and the melody.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus lay Alison and Nicholas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In business of mirth and in solace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until the bell of laudes* gan to ring, *morning service, at 3.a.m.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And friars in the chancel went to sing.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This parish clerk, this amorous Absolon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is for love alway so woebegone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the Monday was at Oseney</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With company, him to disport and play;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And asked upon cas* a cloisterer** *occasion **monk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full privily after John the carpenter;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he drew him apart out of the church,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said, "I n'ot;* I saw him not here wirch** *know not **work</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since Saturday; I trow that he be went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For timber, where our abbot hath him sent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dwellen at the Grange a day or two:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he is wont for timber for to go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or else he is at his own house certain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where that he be, I cannot *soothly sayn.*" *say certainly*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Absolon full jolly was and light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thought, "Now is the time to wake all night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For sickerly* I saw him not stirring *certainly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About his door, since day began to spring.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So may I thrive, but I shall at cock crow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full privily go knock at his window,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That stands full low upon his bower* wall: *chamber</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Alison then will I tellen all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My love-longing; for I shall not miss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That at the leaste way I shall her kiss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some manner comfort shall I have, parfay*, *by my faith</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My mouth hath itched all this livelong day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is a sign of kissing at the least.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All night I mette* eke I was at a feast. *dreamt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore I will go sleep an hour or tway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the night then will I wake and play."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that the first cock crowed had, anon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up rose this jolly lover Absolon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And him arrayed gay, *at point devise.* *with exact care*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But first he chewed grains&lt;34&gt; and liquorice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To smelle sweet, ere he had combed his hair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under his tongue a true love &lt;35&gt; he bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thereby thought he to be gracious.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then came he to the carpentere's house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still he stood under the shot window;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto his breast it raught*, it was so low; *reached</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And soft he coughed with a semisoun'.* *low tone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"What do ye, honeycomb, sweet Alisoun?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My faire bird, my sweet cinamome*, *cinnamon, sweet spice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awaken, leman* mine, and speak to me. *mistress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full little thinke ye upon my woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That for your love I sweat *there as* I go. *wherever</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No wonder is that I do swelt* and sweat. *faint</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I mourn as doth a lamb after the teat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Y-wis*, leman, I have such love-longing, *certainly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That like a turtle* true is my mourning. *turtle-dove</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I may not eat, no more than a maid."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Go from the window, thou jack fool," she said:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"As help me God, it will not be, 'come ba* me.' *kiss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I love another, else I were to blame",</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well better than thee, by Jesus, Absolon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go forth thy way, or I will cast a stone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let me sleep; *a twenty devil way*. *twenty devils take ye!*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Alas!" quoth Absolon, "and well away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That true love ever was so ill beset:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then kiss me, since that it may be no bet*, *better</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Jesus' love, and for the love of me."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Wilt thou then go thy way therewith?" , quoth she.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Yea, certes, leman," quoth this Absolon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Then make thee ready," quoth she, "I come anon."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>[And unto Nicholas she said *full still*: *in a low voice*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Now peace, and thou shalt laugh anon thy fill."]&lt;36&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Absolon down set him on his knees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said; "I am a lord at all degrees:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For after this I hope there cometh more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leman, thy grace, and, sweete bird, thine ore.*" *favour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The window she undid, and that in haste.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Have done," quoth she, "come off, and speed thee fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest that our neighebours should thee espy."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Absolon gan wipe his mouth full dry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dark was the night as pitch or as the coal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the window she put out her hole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Absolon him fell ne bet ne werse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with his mouth he kiss'd her naked erse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full savourly. When he was ware of this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aback he start, and thought it was amiss;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For well he wist a woman hath no beard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He felt a thing all rough, and long y-hair'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saide; "Fy, alas! what have I do?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Te he!" quoth she, and clapt the window to;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Absolon went forth at sorry pace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"A beard, a beard," said Hendy Nicholas;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"By God's corpus, this game went fair and well."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This silly Absolon heard every deal*, *word</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on his lip he gan for anger bite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to himself he said, "I shall thee quite*. *requite, be even with</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who rubbeth now, who frotteth* now his lips *rubs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With dust, with sand, with straw, with cloth, with chips,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Absolon? that saith full oft, "Alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My soul betake I unto Sathanas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But me were lever* than all this town," quoth he *rather</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I this despite awroken* for to be. *revenged</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! alas! that I have been y-blent*." *deceived</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His hote love is cold, and all y-quent.* *quenched</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For from that time that he had kiss'd her erse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of paramours he *sette not a kers,* *cared not a rush*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he was healed of his malady;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full often paramours he gan defy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And weep as doth a child that hath been beat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A softe pace he went over the street</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto a smith, men callen Dan* Gerveis, *master</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in his forge smithed plough-harness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sharped share and culter busily.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Absolon knocked all easily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said; "Undo, Gerveis, and that anon."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"What, who art thou?" "It is I, Absolon."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"What? Absolon, what? Christe's sweete tree*, *cross</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why rise so rath*? hey! Benedicite, *early</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What aileth you? some gay girl,&lt;37&gt; God it wote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath brought you thus upon the viretote:&lt;38&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Saint Neot, ye wot well what I mean."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Absolon he raughte* not a bean *recked, cared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all his play; no word again he gaf*, *spoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he had more tow on his distaff&lt;39&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than Gerveis knew, and saide; "Friend so dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hote culter in the chimney here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lend it to me, I have therewith to don*: *do</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will it bring again to thee full soon."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gerveis answered; "Certes, were it gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or in a poke* nobles all untold, *purse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shouldst it have, as I am a true smith.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hey! Christe's foot, what will ye do therewith?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Thereof," quoth Absolon, "be as be may;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall well tell it thee another day:"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And caught the culter by the colde stele*. *handle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full soft out at the door he gan to steal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And went unto the carpentere's wall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He coughed first, and knocked therewithal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the window, light as he did ere*. *before &lt;40&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Alison answered; "Who is there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That knocketh so? I warrant him a thief."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Nay, nay," quoth he, "God wot, my sweete lefe*, *love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am thine Absolon, my own darling.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of gold," quoth he, "I have thee brought a ring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My mother gave it me, so God me save!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full fine it is, and thereto well y-grave*: *engraved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This will I give to thee, if thou me kiss."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now Nicholas was risen up to piss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thought he would *amenden all the jape*; *improve the joke*</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shoulde kiss his erse ere that he scape:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And up the window did he hastily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And out his erse he put full privily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the buttock, to the haunche bone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therewith spake this clerk, this Absolon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Speak, sweete bird, I know not where thou art."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Nicholas anon let fly a fart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As great as it had been a thunder dent*; *peal, clap</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That with the stroke he was well nigh y-blent*; *blinded</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he was ready with his iron hot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Nicholas amid the erse he smote.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Off went the skin an handbreadth all about.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hote culter burned so his tout*, *breech</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That for the smart he weened* he would die; *thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he were wood*, for woe he gan to cry, *mad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Help! water, water, help for Godde's heart!"</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This carpenter out of his slumber start,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heard one cry "Water," as he were wood*, *mad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thought, "Alas! now cometh Noe's flood."</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sat him up withoute wordes mo'</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with his axe he smote the cord in two;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And down went all; he found neither to sell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor bread nor ale, till he came to the sell*, *threshold &lt;41&gt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the floor, and there in swoon he lay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up started Alison and Nicholay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cried out an "harow!" &lt;15&gt; in the street.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The neighbours alle, bothe small and great</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In ranne, for to gauren* on this man, *stare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That yet in swoone lay, both pale and wan:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For with the fall he broken had his arm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But stand he must unto his owen harm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For when he spake, he was anon borne down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Hendy Nicholas and Alisoun.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They told to every man that he was wood*; *mad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was aghaste* so of Noe's flood, *afraid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through phantasy, that of his vanity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had y-bought him kneading-tubbes three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And had them hanged in the roof above;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that he prayed them for Godde's love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sitten in the roof for company.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The folk gan laughen at his phantasy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the roof they kyken* and they gape, *peep, look.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And turned all his harm into a jape*. *jest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For whatsoe'er this carpenter answer'd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was for nought, no man his reason heard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With oathes great he was so sworn adown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he was holden wood in all the town.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For every clerk anon right held with other;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They said, "The man was wood, my leve* brother;" *dear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every wight gan laughen at his strife.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus swived* was the carpentere's wife, *enjoyed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all his keeping* and his jealousy; *care</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Absolon hath kiss'd her nether eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Nicholas is scalded in the tout.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This tale is done, and God save all the rout*. *company</span>
				</p>
				<p>Notes to the Miller's Tale</p>
				<p>1. Almagest: The book of Ptolemy the astronomer, which formed the canon of astrological science in the middle ages.</p>
				<p>2. Astrolabe: "Astrelagour," "astrelabore"; a mathematical instrument for taking the altitude of the sun or stars.</p>
				<p>3. "Augrim" is a corruption of algorithm, the Arabian term for numeration; "augrim stones," therefore were probably marked with numerals, and used as counters.</p>
				<p>4. Angelus ad virginem: The Angel's salutation to Mary; Luke i. 28. It was the "Ave Maria" of the Catholic Church service.</p>
				<p>5. Cato: Though Chaucer may have referred to the famous Censor, more probably the reference is merely to the "Moral Distichs," which go under his name, though written after his time; and in a supplement to which the quoted passage may be found.</p>
				<p>6. Barm-cloth: apron; from Anglo-Saxon "barme," bosom or lap.</p>
				<p>7. Volupere: Head-gear, kerchief; from French, "envelopper," to wrap up.</p>
				<p>8. Popelet: Puppet; but chiefly; young wench.</p>
				<p>9. Noble: nobles were gold coins of especial purity and brightness; "Ex auro nobilissimi, unde nobilis vocatus," (made from the noblest (purest) gold, and therefore called nobles) says Vossius.</p>
				<p>10. Yern: Shrill, lively; German, "gern," willingly, cheerfully.</p>
				<p>11. Braket: bragget, a sweet drink made of honey, spices, &amp;c. In some parts of the country, a drink made from honeycomb, after the honey is extracted, is still called "bragwort."</p>
				<p>12. Piggesnie: a fond term, like "my duck;" from Anglo-Saxon, "piga," a young maid; but Tyrwhitt associates it with the Latin, "ocellus," little eye, a fondling term, and suggests that the "pigs- eye," which is very small, was applied in the same sense. Davenport and Butler both use the word pigsnie, the first for "darling," the second literally for "eye;" and Bishop Gardner, "On True Obedience," in his address to the reader, says: "How softly she was wont to chirpe him under the chin, and kiss him; how prettily she could talk to him (how doth my sweet heart, what saith now pig's-eye)."</p>
				<p>13. Oseney: A once well-known abbey near Oxford.</p>
				<p>14. Trave: travis; a frame in which unruly horses were shod.</p>
				<p>15. Harow and Alas: Haro! was an old Norman cry for redress or aid. The "Clameur de Haro" was lately raised, under peculiar circumstances, as the prelude to a legal protest, in Jersey.</p>
				<p>16. His shoes were ornamented like the windows of St. Paul's, especially like the old rose-window.</p>
				<p>17. Rise: Twig, bush; German, "Reis," a twig; "Reisig," a copse.</p>
				<p>18. Chaucer satirises the dancing of Oxford as he did the French of Stratford at Bow.</p>
				<p>19. Shot window: A projecting or bow window, whence it was possible shoot at any one approaching the door.</p>
				<p>20. Piment: A drink made with wine, honey, and spices.</p>
				<p>21. Because she was town-bred, he offered wealth, or money reward, for her love.</p>
				<p>22. Parish-clerks, like Absolon, had leading parts in the mysteries or religious plays; Herod was one of these parts, which may have been an object of competition among the amateurs of the period.</p>
				<p>23 ."The nighe sly maketh oft time the far lief to be loth": a proverb; the cunning one near at hand oft makes the loving one afar off to be odious.</p>
				<p>24. Kyked: Looked; "keek" is still used in some parts in the sense of "peep."</p>
				<p>25. Saint Frideswide was the patroness of a considerable priory at Oxford, and held there in high repute.</p>
				<p>26. Plato, in his "Theatetus," tells this story of Thales; but it has since appeared in many other forms.</p>
				<p>27. Crouche: protect by signing the sign of the cross.</p>
				<p>28. Forlore: lost; german, "verloren."</p>
				<p>29. Him that harried Hell: Christ who wasted or subdued hell: in the middle ages, some very active exploits against the prince of darkness and his powers were ascribed by the monkish tale- tellers to the saviour after he had "descended into hell."</p>
				<p>30. According to the old mysteries, Noah's wife refused to come into the ark, and bade her husband row forth and get him a new wife, because he was leaving her gossips in the town to drown. Shem and his brothers got her shipped by main force; and Noah, coming forward to welcome her, was greeted with a box on the ear.</p>
				<p>31. "Him had been lever, I dare well undertake, At thilke time, than all his wethers black, That she had had a ship herself alone." i.e. "At that time he would have given all his black wethers, if she had had an ark to herself."</p>
				<p>32. "Clum," like "mum," a note of silence; but otherwise explained as the humming sound made in repeating prayers; from the Anglo-Saxon, "clumian," to mutter, speak in an under- tone, keep silence.</p>
				<p>33. Curfew-time: Eight in the evening, when, by the law of William the Conqueror, all people were, on ringing of a bell, to extinguish fire and candle, and go to rest; hence the word curfew, from French, "couvre-feu," cover-fire.</p>
				<p>34. Absolon chewed grains: these were grains of Paris, or Paradise; a favourite spice.</p>
				<p>35. Under his tongue a true love he bare: some sweet herb; another reading, however, is "a true love-knot," which may have been of the nature of a charm.</p>
				<p>36. The two lines within brackets are not in most of the editions: they are taken from Urry; whether he supplied them or not, they serve the purpose of a necessary explanation.</p>
				<p>37. Gay girl: As applied to a young woman of light manners, this euphemistic phrase has enjoyed a wonderful vitality.</p>
				<p>38. Viretote: Urry reads "meritote," and explains it from Spelman as a game in which children made themselves giddy by whirling on ropes. In French, "virer" means to turn; and the explanation may, therefore, suit either reading. In modern slang parlance, Gerveis would probably have said, "on the rampage," or "on the swing" — not very far from Spelman's rendering.</p>
				<p>39. He had more tow on his distaff: a proverbial saying: he was playing a deeper game, had more serious business on hand.</p>
				<p>40. Ere: before; German, "eher."</p>
				<p>41. Sell: sill of the door, threshold; French, "seuil," Latin, "solum," the ground.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
