<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Nun’s Priest’s Tale</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-nuns-priests-tale" epub:type="division z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Nun’s Priest’s Tale</h2>
			<section id="the-nuns-priests-tale-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Prologue</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Ho!” quoth the Knight, “good sir, no more of this;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ye have said is right enough, y-wis,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4235" id="noteref-4235" epub:type="noteref">4235</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And muchë more; for little heaviness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is right enough to muchë folk, I guess.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say for me, it is a great disease,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4236" id="noteref-4236" epub:type="noteref">4236</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where as men have been in great wealth and ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hearen of their sudden fall, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the contráry is joy and great solas,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4237" id="noteref-4237" epub:type="noteref">4237</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when a man hath been in poor estate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And climbeth up, and waxeth fortunate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there abideth in prosperity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such thing is gladsome, as it thinketh me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of such thing were goodly for to tell.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Yea,” quoth our Hostë, “by Saint Paulë’s bell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye say right sooth; this monk hath clapped<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4238" id="noteref-4238" epub:type="noteref">4238</a> loud;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He spake how Fortune cover’d with a cloud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wot not what, and als’ of a tragédy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right now ye heard: and pardie no remédy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is for to bewailë, nor complain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That that is done, and also it is pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ye have said, to hear of heaviness.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sir Monk, no more of this, so God you bless;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your tale annoyeth all this company;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such talking is not worth a butterfly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For therein is there no sport nor game;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore, Sir Monkë, Dan Piers by your name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray you heart’ly, tell us somewhat else,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For sickerly, n’ere clinking of your bells,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4239" id="noteref-4239" epub:type="noteref">4239</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That on your bridle hang on every side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By heaven’s king, that for us allë died,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I should ere this have fallen down for sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although the slough had been never so deep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then had your talë been all told in vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For certainly, as thesë clerkës sayn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where as a man may have no audience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nought helpeth it to tellë his senténce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And well I wot the substance is in me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If anything shall well reported be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sir, say somewhat of hunting,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4240" id="noteref-4240" epub:type="noteref">4240</a> I you pray.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Nay,” quoth the Monk, “I have no lust to play;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4241" id="noteref-4241" epub:type="noteref">4241</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now let another tell, as I have told.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then spake our Host with rudë speech and bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said unto the Nunnë’s Priest anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Come near, thou Priest, come hither, thou Sir John,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4242" id="noteref-4242" epub:type="noteref">4242</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell us such thing as may our heartës glade.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4243" id="noteref-4243" epub:type="noteref">4243</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be blithe, although thou ride upon a jade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What though thine horse be bothë foul and lean?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he will serve thee, reck thou not a bean;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look that thine heart be merry evermo’.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Yes, Host,” quoth he, “so may I ride or go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4244" id="noteref-4244" epub:type="noteref">4244</a> I be merry, y-wis I will be blamed.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And right anon his tale he hath attamed;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4245" id="noteref-4245" epub:type="noteref">4245</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus he said unto us every one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This sweetë priest, this goodly man, Sir John.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-nuns-priests-tale-main" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Tale<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4246" id="noteref-4246" epub:type="noteref">4246</a></h3>
				<p>
					<span>A poor widow, somedeal y-stept<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4247" id="noteref-4247" epub:type="noteref">4247</a> in age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was whilom dwelling in a poor cottáge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beside a grovë, standing in a dale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This widow, of which I tellë you my tale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since thilkë day that she was last a wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In patiénce led a full simple life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For little was her chattel and her rent.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4248" id="noteref-4248" epub:type="noteref">4248</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>By husbandry<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4249" id="noteref-4249" epub:type="noteref">4249</a> of such as God her sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She found<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4250" id="noteref-4250" epub:type="noteref">4250</a> herself, and eke her daughters two.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three largë sowës had she, and no mo’;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three kine, and eke a sheep that hightë Mall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full sooty was her bow’r,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4251" id="noteref-4251" epub:type="noteref">4251</a> and eke her hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which she ate full many a slender meal.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of poignant saucë knew she never a deal.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4252" id="noteref-4252" epub:type="noteref">4252</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>No dainty morsel passed through her throat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her diet was accordant to her cote.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4253" id="noteref-4253" epub:type="noteref">4253</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Repletión her madë never sick;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attemper<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4254" id="noteref-4254" epub:type="noteref">4254</a> diet was all her physíc,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And exercise, and heartë’s suffisance.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4255" id="noteref-4255" epub:type="noteref">4255</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The goutë let her nothing<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4256" id="noteref-4256" epub:type="noteref">4256</a> for to dance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor apoplexy shentë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4257" id="noteref-4257" epub:type="noteref">4257</a> not her head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No winë drank she, neither white nor red:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her board was served most with white and black,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Milk and brown bread, in which she found no lack,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seind<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4258" id="noteref-4258" epub:type="noteref">4258</a> bacon, and sometimes an egg or tway;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she was as it were a manner dey.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4259" id="noteref-4259" epub:type="noteref">4259</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A yard<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4260" id="noteref-4260" epub:type="noteref">4260</a> she had, enclosed all about</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With stickës, and a dryë ditch without,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which she had a cock, hight Chanticleer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all the land of crowing n’as<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4261" id="noteref-4261" epub:type="noteref">4261</a> his peer.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4262" id="noteref-4262" epub:type="noteref">4262</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>His voice was merrier than the merry orgón,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4263" id="noteref-4263" epub:type="noteref">4263</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>On massë days that in the churches gon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well sickerer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4264" id="noteref-4264" epub:type="noteref">4264</a> was his crowing in his lodge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than is a clock, or an abbáy horloge.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4265" id="noteref-4265" epub:type="noteref">4265</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>By nature he knew each ascensioún</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of th’ equinoctial in thilkë town;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For when degrees fiftenë were ascended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then crew he, that it might not be amended.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His comb was redder than the fine corál,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Embattell’d<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4266" id="noteref-4266" epub:type="noteref">4266</a> as it were a castle wall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His bill was black, and as the jet it shone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like azure were his leggës and his tone;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4267" id="noteref-4267" epub:type="noteref">4267</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>His nailës whiter than the lily flow’r,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And like the burnish’d gold was his coloúr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This gentle cock had in his governánce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sev’n hennës, for to do all his pleasánce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which were his sisters and his paramours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wondrous like to him as of coloúrs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which the fairest-hued in the throat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was called Damosellë Partelote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Courteous she was, discreet, and debonair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cómpaniáble,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4268" id="noteref-4268" epub:type="noteref">4268</a> and bare herself so fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sincë the day that she sev’n night was old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That truëly she had the heart in hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Chanticleer, locked in every lith;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4269" id="noteref-4269" epub:type="noteref">4269</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lov’d her so, that well was him therewith.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But such a joy it was to hear them sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that the brightë sunnë gan to spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sweet accord, “My lefe<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4270" id="noteref-4270" epub:type="noteref">4270</a> is fare<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4271" id="noteref-4271" epub:type="noteref">4271</a> in land.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4272" id="noteref-4272" epub:type="noteref">4272</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, at that time, as I have understand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beastës and birdës couldë speak and sing.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And so befell, that in a dawëning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Chanticleer among his wivës all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sat on his perchë, that was in the hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And next him sat this fairë Partelote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Chanticleer gan groanen in his throat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As man that in his dream is dretched<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4273" id="noteref-4273" epub:type="noteref">4273</a> sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when that Partelote thus heard him roar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was aghast,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4274" id="noteref-4274" epub:type="noteref">4274</a> and saidë, “Heartë dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What aileth you to groan in this mannére?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye be a very sleeper, fy for shame!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he answer’d and saidë thus; “Madame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray you that ye take it not agrief;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4275" id="noteref-4275" epub:type="noteref">4275</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>By God, me mette<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4276" id="noteref-4276" epub:type="noteref">4276</a> I was in such mischíef,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4277" id="noteref-4277" epub:type="noteref">4277</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right now, that yet mine heart is sore affright’.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now God,” quoth he, “my sweven<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4278" id="noteref-4278" epub:type="noteref">4278</a> read aright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And keep my body out of foul prisoún.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me mette,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4279" id="noteref-4279" epub:type="noteref">4279</a> how that I roamed up and down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within our yard, where as I saw a beast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was like an hound, and would have made arrest<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4280" id="noteref-4280" epub:type="noteref">4280</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon my body, and would have had me dead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His colour was betwixt yellow and red;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tipped was his tail, and both his ears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With black, unlike the remnant of his hairs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His snout was small, with glowing eyen tway;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet of his look almost for fear I dey;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4281" id="noteref-4281" epub:type="noteref">4281</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>This caused me my groaning, doubtëless.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Away,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4282" id="noteref-4282" epub:type="noteref">4282</a> quoth she, “fy on you, heartëless!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4283" id="noteref-4283" epub:type="noteref">4283</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas!” quoth she, “for, by that God above!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now have ye lost my heart and all my love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot love a coward, by my faith.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For certes, what so any woman saith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We all desiren, if it mightë be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To have husbandës hardy, wise, and free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And secret, and no niggard nor no fool,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor him that is aghast<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4284" id="noteref-4284" epub:type="noteref">4284</a> of every tool,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4285" id="noteref-4285" epub:type="noteref">4285</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor no avantour,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4286" id="noteref-4286" epub:type="noteref">4286</a> by that God above!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How durstë ye for shame say to your love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That anything might makë you afear’d?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have ye no mannë’s heart, and have a beard?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! and can ye be aghast of swevenës?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4287" id="noteref-4287" epub:type="noteref">4287</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing but vanity, God wot, in sweven is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swevens engender of<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4288" id="noteref-4288" epub:type="noteref">4288</a> repletións,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And oft of fume, and of complexións,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When humours be too abundant in a wight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Certes this dream, which ye have mette tonight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cometh of the great supefluity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of yourë redë <i xml:lang="la">cholera</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4289" id="noteref-4289" epub:type="noteref">4289</a> pardie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which causeth folk to dreaden in their dreams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of arrows, and of fire with redë beams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of redë beastës, that they will them bite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of conteke,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4290" id="noteref-4290" epub:type="noteref">4290</a> and of whelpës great and lite;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4291" id="noteref-4291" epub:type="noteref">4291</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right as the humour of meláncholy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Causeth full many a man in sleep to cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For fear of bullës, or of bearës blake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ellës that black devils will them take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of other humours could I tell also,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That workë many a man in sleep much woe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I will pass as lightly as I can.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, Cato, which that was so wise a man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said he not thus, ‘Ne do no force of<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4292" id="noteref-4292" epub:type="noteref">4292</a> dreams,’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, Sir,” quoth she, “when we fly from these beams,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4293" id="noteref-4293" epub:type="noteref">4293</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Goddë’s love, as take some laxatife;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On peril of my soul, and of my life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I counsel you the best, I will not lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That both of choler, and meláncholy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye purgë you; and, for ye shall not tarry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though in this town is no apothecáry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall myself two herbës teachë you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That shall be for your health, and for your prow;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4294" id="noteref-4294" epub:type="noteref">4294</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in our yard the herbës shall I find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which have of their property by kind<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4295" id="noteref-4295" epub:type="noteref">4295</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To purgë you beneath, and eke above.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sirë, forget not this for Goddë’s love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye be full choleric of complexión;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ware that the sun, in his ascensión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You findë not replete of humours hot;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if it do, I dare well lay a groat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ye shall have a fever tertiane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or else an ague, that may be your bane,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A day or two ye shall have digestives</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of wormës, ere ye take your laxatives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of laurel, centaury,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4296" id="noteref-4296" epub:type="noteref">4296</a> and fumeterére,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4297" id="noteref-4297" epub:type="noteref">4297</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or else of elder-berry, that groweth there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of catapuce,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4298" id="noteref-4298" epub:type="noteref">4298</a> or of the gaitre-berries,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4299" id="noteref-4299" epub:type="noteref">4299</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or herb ivy growing in our yard, that merry is:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pick them right as they grow, and eat them in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be merry, husband, for your father’s kin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dreadë no dream; I can say you no more.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Madame,” quoth he, “<i xml:lang="fr">grand mercy</i> of your lore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But natheless, as touching Dan Catoún,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hath of wisdom such a great renown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though that he bade no dreamës for to dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By God, men may in oldë bookës read</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of many a man more of authority</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than ever Cato was, so may I thé,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4300" id="noteref-4300" epub:type="noteref">4300</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all the reversë say of his senténce,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4301" id="noteref-4301" epub:type="noteref">4301</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And have well founden by experience</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That dreamës be significatións</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As well of joy, as tribulatións</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That folk enduren in this life presént.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There needeth make of this no argument;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very prevë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4302" id="noteref-4302" epub:type="noteref">4302</a> sheweth it indeed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One of the greatest authors that men read<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4303" id="noteref-4303" epub:type="noteref">4303</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saith thus, that whilom two fellówës went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On pilgrimage in a full good intent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And happen’d so, they came into a town</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where there was such a congregatioún</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of people, and eke so strait of herbergage,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4304" id="noteref-4304" epub:type="noteref">4304</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they found not as much as one cottáge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which they bothë might y-lodged be:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore they musten of necessity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As for that night, departë company;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And each of them went to his hostelry,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4305" id="noteref-4305" epub:type="noteref">4305</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And took his lodging as it wouldë fall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The one of them was lodged in a stall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far in a yard, with oxen of the plough;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That other man was lodged well enow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As was his áventúre, or his fortúne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That us govérneth all, as in commúne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so befell, that, long ere it were day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This man mette<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4306" id="noteref-4306" epub:type="noteref">4306</a> in his bed, there as he lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How that his fellow gan upon him call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said, ‘Alas! for in an ox’s stall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This night shall I be murder’d, where I lie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now help me, dearë brother, or I die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In allë hastë come to me,’ he said.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This man out of his sleep for fear abraid;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4307" id="noteref-4307" epub:type="noteref">4307</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when that he was wak’d out of his sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He turned him, and took of this no keep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He thought his dream was but a vanity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus twiës in his sleeping dreamed he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the thirdë time yet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4308" id="noteref-4308" epub:type="noteref">4308</a> his felláw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came, as he thought, and said, ‘I am now slaw;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4309" id="noteref-4309" epub:type="noteref">4309</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold my bloody woundës, deep and wide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arise up early, in the morning, tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the west gate of the town,’ quoth he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘A cartë full of dung there shalt: thou see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which my body is hid privily.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do thilkë cart arrostë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4310" id="noteref-4310" epub:type="noteref">4310</a> boldëly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My gold caused my murder, sooth to sayn.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And told him every point how he was slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a full piteous face, and pale of hue.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And, trustë well, his dream he found full true;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For on the morrow, as soon as it was day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To his fellówë’s inn he took his way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when that he came to this ox’s stall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After his fellow he began to call.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hostelére answered him anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saidë, ‘Sir, your fellow is y-gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As soon as day he went out of the town.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This man gan fallen in suspicioún,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rememb’ring on his dreamës that he mette,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4311" id="noteref-4311" epub:type="noteref">4311</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And forth he went, no longer would he let,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4312" id="noteref-4312" epub:type="noteref">4312</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto the west gate of the town, and fand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dung cart, as it went for to dung land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was arrayed in the samë wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ye have heard the deadë man devise;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4313" id="noteref-4313" epub:type="noteref">4313</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with an hardy heart he gan to cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Vengeance and justice of this felony:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My fellow murder’d in this samë night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in this cart he lies, gaping upright.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cry out on the ministers,’ quoth he.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘That shouldë keep and rule this city;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Harow! alas! here lies my fellow slain.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What should I more unto this talë sayn?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The people out start, and cast the cart to ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the middle of the dung they found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The deadë man, that murder’d was all new.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O blissful God! that art so good and true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, how that thou bewray’st murder alway.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Murder will out, that see we day by day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Murder is so wlatsom<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4314" id="noteref-4314" epub:type="noteref">4314</a> and abominable</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To God, that is so just and reasonable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he will not suffer it heled<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4315" id="noteref-4315" epub:type="noteref">4315</a> be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though it abide a year, or two, or three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Murder will out, this is my conclusioún,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And right anon, the ministers of the town</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have hent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4316" id="noteref-4316" epub:type="noteref">4316</a> the carter, and so sore him pined,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4317" id="noteref-4317" epub:type="noteref">4317</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke the hostelére so sore engined,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4318" id="noteref-4318" epub:type="noteref">4318</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they beknew<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4319" id="noteref-4319" epub:type="noteref">4319</a> their wickedness anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And werë hanged by the neckë bone.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Here may ye see that dreamës be to dread.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And certes in the samë book I read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right in the nextë chapter after this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(I gabbë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4320" id="noteref-4320" epub:type="noteref">4320</a> not, so have I joy and bliss),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two men that would have passed over sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For certain cause, into a far countrý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that the wind not haddë been contráry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That made them in a city for to tarry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That stood full merry upon an haven side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But on a day, against the even-tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wind gan change, and blew right as them lest.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4321" id="noteref-4321" epub:type="noteref">4321</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jolly and glad they wentë to their rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And castë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4322" id="noteref-4322" epub:type="noteref">4322</a> them full early for to sail.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to the one man fell a great marvail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That one of them, in sleeping as he lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He mette<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4323" id="noteref-4323" epub:type="noteref">4323</a> a wondrous dream, against the day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He thought a man stood by his beddë’s side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And him commanded that he should abide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said him thus; ‘If thou to-morrow wend,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4324" id="noteref-4324" epub:type="noteref">4324</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt be drown’d; my tale is at an end.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He woke, and told his follow what he mette,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And prayed him his voyage for to let;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4325" id="noteref-4325" epub:type="noteref">4325</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As for that day, he pray’d him to abide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His fellow, that lay by his beddë’s side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gan for to laugh, and scorned him full fast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘No dream,’ quoth he, ‘may so my heart aghast,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4326" id="noteref-4326" epub:type="noteref">4326</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I will lettë for to do my things.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4327" id="noteref-4327" epub:type="noteref">4327</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I settë not a straw by thy dreamíngs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For swevens<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4328" id="noteref-4328" epub:type="noteref">4328</a> be but vanities and japes.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4329" id="noteref-4329" epub:type="noteref">4329</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men dream all day of owlës and of apes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke of many a mazë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4330" id="noteref-4330" epub:type="noteref">4330</a> therewithal;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men dream of thing that never was, nor shall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But since I see, that thou wilt here abide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus forslothë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4331" id="noteref-4331" epub:type="noteref">4331</a> wilfully thy tide,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4332" id="noteref-4332" epub:type="noteref">4332</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>God wot, it rueth me;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4333" id="noteref-4333" epub:type="noteref">4333</a> and have good day.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus he took his leave, and went his way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, ere that he had half his coursë sail’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know not why, nor what mischance it ail’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But casually<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4334" id="noteref-4334" epub:type="noteref">4334</a> the ship’s bottom rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ship and man under the water went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sight of other shippës there beside</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That with him sailed at the samë tide.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4335" id="noteref-4335" epub:type="noteref">4335</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“And therefore, fairë Partelote so dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By such examples oldë may’st thou lear,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4336" id="noteref-4336" epub:type="noteref">4336</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That no man shouldë be too reckëless</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of dreamës, for I say thee doubtëless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That many a dream full sore is for to dread.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, in the life of Saint Kenelm<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4337" id="noteref-4337" epub:type="noteref">4337</a> I read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That was Kenulphus’ son, the noble king</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Mercenrike,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4338" id="noteref-4338" epub:type="noteref">4338</a> how Kenelm mette a thing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little ere he was murder’d on a day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His murder in his visión he say.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4339" id="noteref-4339" epub:type="noteref">4339</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>His norice<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4340" id="noteref-4340" epub:type="noteref">4340</a> him expounded every deal<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4341" id="noteref-4341" epub:type="noteref">4341</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>His sweven, and bade him to keep<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4342" id="noteref-4342" epub:type="noteref">4342</a> him well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For treason; but he was but seven years old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore little talë hath he told<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4343" id="noteref-4343" epub:type="noteref">4343</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of any dream, so holy was his heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By God, I haddë lever than my shirt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ye had read his legend, as have I.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dame Partelote, I say you truëly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Macrobius, that wrote the visión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Afric’ of the worthy Scipion,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4344" id="noteref-4344" epub:type="noteref">4344</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Affirmeth dreamës, and saith that they be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Warnings of thingës that men after see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And furthermore, I pray you lookë well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the Old Testament, of Daniél,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he held dreamës any vanity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Read eke of Joseph, and there shall ye see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether dreams be sometimes (I say not all)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warnings of thingës that shall after fall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look of Egypt the king, Dan Pharaóh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His baker and his buteler also,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether they feltë none effect<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4345" id="noteref-4345" epub:type="noteref">4345</a> in dreams.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whoso will seek the acts of sundry remes<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4346" id="noteref-4346" epub:type="noteref">4346</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>May read of dreamës many a wondrous thing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo Croesus, which that was of Lydia king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mette he not that he sat upon a tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which signified he shouldë hanged be?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4347" id="noteref-4347" epub:type="noteref">4347</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo here, Andromaché, Hectorë’s wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That day that Hector shouldë lose his life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She dreamed on the samë night beforn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How that the life of Hector should be lorn,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4348" id="noteref-4348" epub:type="noteref">4348</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thilkë day he went into battaile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She warned him, but it might not avail;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wentë forth to fightë natheless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And was y-slain anon of Achillés.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thilkë tale is all too long to tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke it is nigh day, I may not dwell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shortly I say, as for conclusión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I shall have of this avisión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adversity; and I say furthermore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I ne tell of laxatives no store,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4349" id="noteref-4349" epub:type="noteref">4349</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For they be venomous, I wot it well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I them defy,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4350" id="noteref-4350" epub:type="noteref">4350</a> I love them never a del.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4351" id="noteref-4351" epub:type="noteref">4351</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“But let us speak of mirth, and stint<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4352" id="noteref-4352" epub:type="noteref">4352</a> all this;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Madamë Partelote, so have I bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of one thing God hath sent me largë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4353" id="noteref-4353" epub:type="noteref">4353</a> grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For when I see the beauty of your face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye be so scarlet-hued about your eyen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I maketh all my dreadë for to dien,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, all so sicker<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4354" id="noteref-4354" epub:type="noteref">4354</a> as <i xml:lang="la">In principio,</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4355" id="noteref-4355" epub:type="noteref">4355</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<i xml:lang="la">Mulier est hominis confusio.</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4356" id="noteref-4356" epub:type="noteref">4356</a>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Madam, the sentence<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4357" id="noteref-4357" epub:type="noteref">4357</a> of this Latin is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Woman is mannë’s joy and mannë’s bliss.)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For when I feel at night your softë side⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Albeit that I may not on you ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that our perch is made so narrow, alas!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am so full of joy and of solas,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4358" id="noteref-4358" epub:type="noteref">4358</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I defy both sweven and eke dream.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with that word he flew down from the beam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For it was day, and eke his hennës all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with a chuck he gan them for to call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he had found a corn, lay in the yard.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Royal he was, he was no more afear’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He feather’d Partelotë twenty time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as oft trode her, ere that it was prime.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He looked as it were a grim lioún,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on his toes he roamed up and down;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He deigned not to set his feet to ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He chucked, when he had a corn y-found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to him rannë then his wivës all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus royal, as a prince is in his hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leave I this Chanticleer in his pastúre;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after will I tell his áventúre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When that the month in which the world began,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hightë March, when God first maked man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was cómplete, and y-passed were also,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sincë March ended, thirty days and two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Befell that Chanticleer in all his pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His seven wivës walking him beside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cast up his eyen to the brightë sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in the sign of Taurus had y-run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twenty degrees and one, and somewhat more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He knew by kind,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4359" id="noteref-4359" epub:type="noteref">4359</a> and by none other lore,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4360" id="noteref-4360" epub:type="noteref">4360</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That it was prime, and crew with blissful steven.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4361" id="noteref-4361" epub:type="noteref">4361</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“The sun,” he said, “is clomben up in heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twenty degrees and one, and more y-wis.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4362" id="noteref-4362" epub:type="noteref">4362</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Madamë Partelote, my worldë’s bliss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hearken these blissful birdës how they sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And see the freshë flowers how they spring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full is mine heart of revel and solace.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But suddenly him fell a sorrowful case;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4363" id="noteref-4363" epub:type="noteref">4363</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ever the latter end of joy is woe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God wot that worldly joy is soon y-go:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, if a rhetor<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4364" id="noteref-4364" epub:type="noteref">4364</a> couldë fair indite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He in a chronicle might it safely write,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As for a sov’reign notability.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4365" id="noteref-4365" epub:type="noteref">4365</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now every wise man, let him hearken me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This story is all as true, I undertake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As is the book of Launcelot du Lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That women hold in full great reverence.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now will I turn again to my senténce.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A col-fox,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4366" id="noteref-4366" epub:type="noteref">4366</a> full of sly iniquity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in the grove had wonned<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4367" id="noteref-4367" epub:type="noteref">4367</a> yearës three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By high imaginatión forecast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The samë night thorough the hedges brast<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4368" id="noteref-4368" epub:type="noteref">4368</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the yard, where Chanticleer the fair</span>
					<br/>
					<br/>
					<span>And in a bed of wortës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4369" id="noteref-4369" epub:type="noteref">4369</a> still he lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till it was passed undern<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4370" id="noteref-4370" epub:type="noteref">4370</a> of the day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waiting his time on Chanticleer to fall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As gladly do these homicidës all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in awaitë lie to murder men.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O falsë murd’rer! Rouking<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4371" id="noteref-4371" epub:type="noteref">4371</a> in thy den!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O new Iscariot, new Ganilion!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4372" id="noteref-4372" epub:type="noteref">4372</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>O false dissimuler, O Greek Sinón,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4373" id="noteref-4373" epub:type="noteref">4373</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That broughtest Troy all utterly to sorrow!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Chanticleer! accursed be the morrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou into thy yard flew from the beams;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4374" id="noteref-4374" epub:type="noteref">4374</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wert full well y-warned by thy dreams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thilkë day was perilous to thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what that God forewot<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4375" id="noteref-4375" epub:type="noteref">4375</a> must needës be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After th’ opinion of certain clerkës.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Witness on him that any perfect clerk is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in school is great altercatión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this matter, and great disputatión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hath been of an hundred thousand men.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I ne cannot boult it to the bren,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4376" id="noteref-4376" epub:type="noteref">4376</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As can the holy doctor Augustine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Boece, or the bishop Bradwardine,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4377" id="noteref-4377" epub:type="noteref">4377</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether that Goddë’s worthy foreweeting<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4378" id="noteref-4378" epub:type="noteref">4378</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Straineth me needly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4379" id="noteref-4379" epub:type="noteref">4379</a> for to do a thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Needly call I simple necessity),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ellës if free choice be granted me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To do that samë thing, or do it not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though God forewot<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4380" id="noteref-4380" epub:type="noteref">4380</a> it ere that it was wrought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or if his weeting<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4381" id="noteref-4381" epub:type="noteref">4381</a> straineth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4382" id="noteref-4382" epub:type="noteref">4382</a> never a deal,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4383" id="noteref-4383" epub:type="noteref">4383</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But by necessity conditionel.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will not have to do of such mattére;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My tale is of a cock, as ye may hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That took his counsel of his wife, with sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To walken in the yard upon the morrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he had mette the dream, as I you told.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Womanë’s counsels be full often cold;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4384" id="noteref-4384" epub:type="noteref">4384</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Womanë’s counsel brought us first to woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made Adám from Paradise to go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There as he was full merry and well at case.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, for I n’ot<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4385" id="noteref-4385" epub:type="noteref">4385</a> to whom I might displease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I counsél of women wouldë blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pass over, for I said it in my game.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4386" id="noteref-4386" epub:type="noteref">4386</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Read authors, where they treat of such mattére,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what they say of women ye may hear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These be the cockë’s wordës, and not mine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I can no harm of no woman divine.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4387" id="noteref-4387" epub:type="noteref">4387</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fair in the sand, to bathe<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4388" id="noteref-4388" epub:type="noteref">4388</a> her merrily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lies Partelote, and all her sisters by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the sun, and Chanticleer so free</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sang merrier than the mermaid in the sea;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Physiologus saith sickerly,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4389" id="noteref-4389" epub:type="noteref">4389</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>How that they singë well and merrily.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4390" id="noteref-4390" epub:type="noteref">4390</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so befell that, as he cast his eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among the wortës,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4391" id="noteref-4391" epub:type="noteref">4391</a> on a butterfly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was ware of this fox that lay full low.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing ne list him thennë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4392" id="noteref-4392" epub:type="noteref">4392</a> for to crow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But cried anon “Cock! cock!” and up he start,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As man that was affrayed in his heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For naturally a beast desireth flee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From his contráry,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4393" id="noteref-4393" epub:type="noteref">4393</a> if be may it see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though he ne’er erst<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4394" id="noteref-4394" epub:type="noteref">4394</a> had soon it with his eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Chanticleer, when he gan him espy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would have fled, but that the fox anon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said, “Gentle Sir, alas! why will ye gon?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be ye afraid of me that am your friend?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, certes, I were worse than any fiend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I to you would harm or villainy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am not come your counsel to espy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But truëly the cause of my comíng</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was only for to hearken how ye sing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For truëly ye have as merry a steven,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4395" id="noteref-4395" epub:type="noteref">4395</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As any angel hath that is in heaven;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therewith ye have of music more feelíng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than had Boece, or any that can sing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My lord your father (God his soulë bless)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke your mother of her gentleness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have in mine housë been, to my great ease:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4396" id="noteref-4396" epub:type="noteref">4396</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And certes, Sir, full fain would I you please.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, for men speak of singing, I will say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So may I brookë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4397" id="noteref-4397" epub:type="noteref">4397</a> well mine eyen tway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save you, I heardë never man so sing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As did your father in the morrowning.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Certes it was of heart all that he sung.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, for to make his voice the morë strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would so pain him,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4398" id="noteref-4398" epub:type="noteref">4398</a> that with both his eyen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He mustë wink, so loud he wouldë cryen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And standen on his tiptoes therewithal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stretchë forth his neckë long and small.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke he was of such discretión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That there was no man, in no región,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That him in song or wisdom mightë pass.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have well read in Dan Burnel the Ass,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4399" id="noteref-4399" epub:type="noteref">4399</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Among his verse, how that there was a cock</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, for<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4400" id="noteref-4400" epub:type="noteref">4400</a> a priestë’s son gave him a knock</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his leg, while he was young and nice,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4401" id="noteref-4401" epub:type="noteref">4401</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He made him for to lose his benefice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But certain there is no comparisón</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betwixt the wisdom and discretión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of yourë father, and his subtilty.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now singë, Sir, for saintë charity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let see, can ye your father counterfeit?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This Chanticleer his wings began to beat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As man that could not his treasón espy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So was he ravish’d with his flattery.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! ye lordës, many a false flattour<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4402" id="noteref-4402" epub:type="noteref">4402</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is in your court, and many a losengeour,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4403" id="noteref-4403" epub:type="noteref">4403</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That pleasë you well morë, by my faith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than he that soothfastness<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4404" id="noteref-4404" epub:type="noteref">4404</a> unto you saith.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Read in Ecclesiast of flattery;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beware, ye lordës, of their treachery.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Chanticleer stood high upon his toes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stretching his neck, and held his eyen close,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gan to crowë loudë for the nonce:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4405" id="noteref-4405" epub:type="noteref">4405</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Dan Russel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4406" id="noteref-4406" epub:type="noteref">4406</a> the fox start up at once,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by the gorgat hentë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4407" id="noteref-4407" epub:type="noteref">4407</a> Chanticleer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on his back toward the wood him bare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For yet was there no man that him pursu’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O destiny, that may’st not be eschew’d!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4408" id="noteref-4408" epub:type="noteref">4408</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas, that Chanticleer flew from the beams!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas, his wifë raughtë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4409" id="noteref-4409" epub:type="noteref">4409</a> nought of dreams!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on a Friday fell all this mischance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Venus, that art goddess of pleasánce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since that thy servant was this Chanticleer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in thy service did all his powére,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More for delight, than the world to multiply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why wilt thou suffer him on thy day to die?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Gaufrid, dearë master sovereign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, when thy worthy king Richárd was slain<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4410" id="noteref-4410" epub:type="noteref">4410</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>With shot, complainedest his death so sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why n’ had I now thy sentence and thy lore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Friday for to chiden, as did ye?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(For on a Friday, soothly, slain was he),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then would I shew you how that I could plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Chanticleerë’s dread, and for his pain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Certes such cry nor lamentatión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was ne’er of ladies made, when Ilión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was won, and Pyrrhus<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4411" id="noteref-4411" epub:type="noteref">4411</a> with his straightë swerd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he had hent king Priam by the beard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And slain him (as saith us <i xml:lang="la">Eneidos</i>),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As maden all the hennës in the close,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4412" id="noteref-4412" epub:type="noteref">4412</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they had seen of Chanticleer the sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But sov’reignly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4413" id="noteref-4413" epub:type="noteref">4413</a> Dame Partelotë shright,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4414" id="noteref-4414" epub:type="noteref">4414</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full louder than did Hasdrubalë’s wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that her husband haddë lost his life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that the Romans had y-burnt Cartháge;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was so full of torment and of rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That wilfully into the fire she start,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And burnt herselfë with a steadfast heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O woeful hennës! right so criëd ye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As, when that Nero burned the citý</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Romë, cried the senatorës’ wives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that their husbands losten all their lives;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Withoutë guilt this Nero hath them slain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now will I turn unto my tale again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4415" id="noteref-4415" epub:type="noteref">4415</a> widow, and her daughters two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heardë these hennës cry and makë woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the doors out started they anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saw the fox toward the wood is gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bare upon his back the cock away:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They criëd, “Out! harow! and well-away!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aha! the fox!” and after him they ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke with stavës many another man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ran Coll our dog, and Talbot, and Garlánd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Malkin, with her distaff in her hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ran cow and calf, and eke the very hoggës,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fear’d they were for barking of the doggës,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shouting of the men and women eke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They rannë so, them thought their hearts would break.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They yelled as the fiendës do in hell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The duckës criëd as men would them quell;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4416" id="noteref-4416" epub:type="noteref">4416</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The geese for fearë flewen o’er the trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of the hivë came the swarm of bees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So hideous was the noise, <i xml:lang="la">ben’dicite!</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Certes he, Jackë Straw,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4417" id="noteref-4417" epub:type="noteref">4417</a> and his meinie,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4418" id="noteref-4418" epub:type="noteref">4418</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne madë never shoutës half so shrill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that they woulden any Fleming kill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thilkë day was made upon the fox.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of brass they broughtë beamës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4419" id="noteref-4419" epub:type="noteref">4419</a> and of box,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of horn and bone, in which they blew and pooped,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4420" id="noteref-4420" epub:type="noteref">4420</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therewithal they shrieked and they hooped;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seemed as the heaven shouldë fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now, goodë men, I pray you hearken all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, how Fortúnë turneth suddenly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hope and pride eke of her enemy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This cock, that lay upon the fox’s back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all his dread unto the fox he spake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saidë, “Sir, if that I were as ye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet would I say (as wisly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4421" id="noteref-4421" epub:type="noteref">4421</a> God help me),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Turn ye again, ye proudë churlës all;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4422" id="noteref-4422" epub:type="noteref">4422</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>A very pestilence upon you fall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now am I come unto the woodë’s side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Maugré your head, the cock shall here abide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will him eat, in faith, and that anon.’ ”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fox answér’d, “In faith it shall be done:”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as he spake the word, all suddenly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cock brake from his mouth deliverly,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4423" id="noteref-4423" epub:type="noteref">4423</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And high upon a tree he flew anon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when the fox saw that the cock was gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Alas!” quoth he, “O Chanticleer, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have,” quoth he, “y-done to you trespass,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4424" id="noteref-4424" epub:type="noteref">4424</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inasmuch as I maked you afear’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When I you hent,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4425" id="noteref-4425" epub:type="noteref">4425</a> and brought out of your yard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, Sir, I did it in no wick’ intent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come down, and I shall tell you what I meant.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall say sooth to you, God help me so.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nay then,” quoth he, “I shrew<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4426" id="noteref-4426" epub:type="noteref">4426</a> us both the two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And first I shrew myself, both blood and bones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If thou beguile me oftener than once.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt no more through thy flattery</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4427" id="noteref-4427" epub:type="noteref">4427</a> me to sing and winkë with mine eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he that winketh when he shouldë see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All wilfully, God let him never thé.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4428" id="noteref-4428" epub:type="noteref">4428</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nay,” quoth the fox; “but God give him mischance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is so indiscreet of governánce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That jangleth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4429" id="noteref-4429" epub:type="noteref">4429</a> when that he should hold his peace.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lo, what it is for to be reckëless</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And negligent, and trust on flattery.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ye that holdë this tale a follý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As of a fox, or of a cock or hen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take the morality thereof, good men.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Saint Paul saith, That all that written is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To our doctríne<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4430" id="noteref-4430" epub:type="noteref">4430</a> it written is y-wis.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4431" id="noteref-4431" epub:type="noteref">4431</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take the fruit, and let the chaff be still.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now goodë God, if that it be thy will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As saith my Lord,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4432" id="noteref-4432" epub:type="noteref">4432</a> so make us all good men;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bring us all to thy high bliss. Amen.</span>
				</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>
					<span>“Sir Nunnë’s Priest,” our Hostë said anon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Y-blessed be thy breech, and every stone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This was a merry tale of Chanticleer.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But by my truth, if thou wert seculére,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4433" id="noteref-4433" epub:type="noteref">4433</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou wouldest be a treadëfowl<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4434" id="noteref-4434" epub:type="noteref">4434</a> aright;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For if thou have couráge as thou hast might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thee werë need of hennës, as I ween,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yea more than seven timës seventeen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See, whatë brawnës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4435" id="noteref-4435" epub:type="noteref">4435</a> hath this gentle priest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So great a neck, and such a largë breast!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He looketh as a sperhawk with his eyen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him needeth not his colour for to dyen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Brazil, nor with grain of Portugale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, Sirë, fairë fall you for your tale.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, after that, he with full merry cheer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said to another, as ye shallë hear.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4436" id="noteref-4436" epub:type="noteref">4436</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="elision">⋮</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
