<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Merchant’s Tale</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:poem">
		<section id="the-merchants-tale" epub:type="division">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Merchant’s Tale</h2>
			<section id="the-merchants-tale-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Prologue<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2738" id="noteref-2738" epub:type="noteref">11</a></h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Weeping and wailing, care and other sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have enough, on even and on morrow,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quoth the Merchánt, “and so have other mo’,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That wedded be; I trow<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2739" id="noteref-2739" epub:type="noteref">12</a> that it be so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For well I wot it fareth so by me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have a wife, the worstë that may be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For though the fiend to her y-coupled were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She would him overmatch, I dare well swear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should I you rehearse in speciál</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her high malíce? she is a shrew at all.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2740" id="noteref-2740" epub:type="noteref">13</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is a long and largë difference</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betwixt Griselda’s greatë patience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of my wife the passing cruelty.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were I unbounden, all so may I thé,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2741" id="noteref-2741" epub:type="noteref">14</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wouldë never eft<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2742" id="noteref-2742" epub:type="noteref">15</a> come in the snare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We wedded men live in sorrow and care;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Assay it whoso will, and he shall find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I say sooth, by Saint Thomas of Ind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As for the morë part; I say not all⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God shieldë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2743" id="noteref-2743" epub:type="noteref">16</a> that it shouldë so befall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! good Sir Host, I have y-wedded be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These moneths two, and morë not, pardie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet I trow<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2744" id="noteref-2744" epub:type="noteref">12</a> that he that all his life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wifeless hath been, though that men would him rive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the heartë, could in no mannére</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tellë so much sorrów, as I you here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could tellen of my wifë’s cursedness.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2745" id="noteref-2745" epub:type="noteref">17</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Now,” quoth our Host, “Merchánt, so God you bless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since ye so muchë knowen of that art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full heartily I pray you tell us part.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Gladly,” quoth he; “but of mine owen sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For sorry heart, I tellë may no more.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-merchants-tale-main" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Tale<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2746" id="noteref-2746" epub:type="noteref">18</a></h3>
				<p>
					<span>Whilom there was dwelling in Lombardy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A worthy knight, that born was at Pavie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which he liv’d in great prosperity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And forty years a wifeless man was he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And follow’d aye his bodily delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On women, where as was his appetite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As do these foolës that be seculeres.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2747" id="noteref-2747" epub:type="noteref">19</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, when that he was passed sixty years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were it for holiness, or for dotáge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot say, but such a great coráge<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2748" id="noteref-2748" epub:type="noteref">20</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haddë this knight to be a wedded man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That day and night he did all that he can</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To espy where that he might wedded be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Praying our Lord to grantë him, that he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mightë once knowen of that blissful life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is betwixt a husband and his wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for to live under that holy bond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which God firstë man and woman bond.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“None other life,” said he, “is worth a bean;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For wedlock is so easy, and so clean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in this world it is a paradise.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus said this oldë knight, that was so wise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And certainly, as sooth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2749" id="noteref-2749" epub:type="noteref">1</a> as God is king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To take a wife it is a glorious thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And namely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2750" id="noteref-2750" epub:type="noteref">2</a> when a man is old and hoar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then is a wife the fruit of his treasór;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then should he take a young wife and a fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On which he might engender him an heir,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lead his life in joy and in solace;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2751" id="noteref-2751" epub:type="noteref">3</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereas these bachelors singen “Alas!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that they find any adversity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In love, which is but childish vanity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And truëly it sits<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2752" id="noteref-2752" epub:type="noteref">4</a> well to be so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That bachelors have often pain and woe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On brittle ground they build, and brittleness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They findë, when they weenë sickerness:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2753" id="noteref-2753" epub:type="noteref">5</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>They live but as a bird or as a beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In liberty, and under no arrest;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2754" id="noteref-2754" epub:type="noteref">6</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereas a wedded man in his estate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Liveth a life blissful and ordinate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the yoke of marriáge y-bound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well may his heart in joy and bliss abound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For who can be so buxom<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2755" id="noteref-2755" epub:type="noteref">7</a> as a wife?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who is so true, and eke so áttentíve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To keep<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2756" id="noteref-2756" epub:type="noteref">8</a> him, sick and whole, as is his make?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2757" id="noteref-2757" epub:type="noteref">9</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For weal or woe she will him not forsake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She is not weary him to love and serve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though that he lie bedrid until he sterve.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2758" id="noteref-2758" epub:type="noteref">10</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet some clerkës say it is not so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which he, Theophrast, is one of tho:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2759" id="noteref-2759" epub:type="noteref">11</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>What force<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2760" id="noteref-2760" epub:type="noteref">12</a> though Theophrast list for to lie?</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Takë no wife,” quoth he, “for husbandry,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2761" id="noteref-2761" epub:type="noteref">13</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As for to spare in household thy dispence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A truë servant doth more diligence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy good to keep, than doth thine owen wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she will claim a half part all her life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if that thou be sick, so God me save,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy very friendës, or a truë knave,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2762" id="noteref-2762" epub:type="noteref">14</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will keep thee bet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2763" id="noteref-2763" epub:type="noteref">15</a> than she, that waiteth aye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2764" id="noteref-2764" epub:type="noteref">16</a> thy good, and hath done many a day.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This sentence, and a hundred timës worse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Writeth this man, there God his bonës curse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But take no keep<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2765" id="noteref-2765" epub:type="noteref">17</a> of all such vanity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Defy<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2766" id="noteref-2766" epub:type="noteref">18</a> Theóphrast, and hearken to me.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A wife is Goddë’s giftë verily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All other manner giftës hardily,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2767" id="noteref-2767" epub:type="noteref">19</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As landës, rentës, pasture, or commúne,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2768" id="noteref-2768" epub:type="noteref">20</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or mebles,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2769" id="noteref-2769" epub:type="noteref">21</a> all be giftës of fortúne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That passen as a shadow on the wall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But dread<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2770" id="noteref-2770" epub:type="noteref">22</a> thou not, if plainly speak I shall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wife will last, and in thine house endure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well longer than thee list, paráventure.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2771" id="noteref-2771" epub:type="noteref">23</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Marriage is a full great sacrament;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He which that hath no wife, I hold him shent;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2772" id="noteref-2772" epub:type="noteref">24</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He liveth helpless, and all desolate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(I speak of folk in secular estate):<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2773" id="noteref-2773" epub:type="noteref">25</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hearken why⁠—I say not this for nought⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That woman is for mannë’s help y-wrought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The highë God, when he had Adam maked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saw him all alonë belly naked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God of his greatë goodness saidë then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us now make a help unto this man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to himself; and then he made him Eve.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here may ye see, and hereby may ye preve,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2774" id="noteref-2774" epub:type="noteref">26</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That a wife is man s help and his comfórt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His paradise terrestre and his disport.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So buxom<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2775" id="noteref-2775" epub:type="noteref">27</a> and so virtuous is she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They mustë needës live in unity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One flesh they be, and one blood, as I guess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With but one heart in weal and in distress.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wife? Ah! Saint Marý, <i xml:lang="la">ben’dicite</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How might a man have any adversity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hath a wife? certes I cannot say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bliss the which that is betwixt them tway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There may no tongue it tell, or heartë think.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he be poor, she helpeth him to swink;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2776" id="noteref-2776" epub:type="noteref">28</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>She keeps his good, and wasteth never a deal;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2777" id="noteref-2777" epub:type="noteref">29</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>All that her husband list, her liketh<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2778" id="noteref-2778" epub:type="noteref">30</a> well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She saith not onës Nay, when he saith Yea;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Do this,” saith he; “All ready, Sir,” saith she.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O blissful order, wedlock precioús!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art so merry, and eke so virtuous,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so commended and approved eke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That every man that holds him worth a leek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his barë knees ought all his life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thank his God, that him hath sent a wife;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ellës pray to God him for to send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wife, to last unto his lifë’s end.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For then his life is set in sickerness,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2779" id="noteref-2779" epub:type="noteref">31</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He may not be deceived, as I guess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that he work after his wifë’s rede;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2780" id="noteref-2780" epub:type="noteref">32</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then may he boldëly bear up his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They be so true, and therewithal so wise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which, if thou wilt worken as the wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do alway so as women will thee rede.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2781" id="noteref-2781" epub:type="noteref">32</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Lo how that Jacob, as these clerkës read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By good counsel of his mother Rebecc’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Boundë the kiddë’s skin about his neck;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which his father’s benison<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2782" id="noteref-2782" epub:type="noteref">33</a> he wan.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo Judith, as the story tellë can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By good counsel she Goddë’s people kept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And slew him, Holofernes, while he slept.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo Abigail, by good counsél, how she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saved her husband Nabal, when that he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should have been slain. And lo, Esther also</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By counsel good deliver’d out of woe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The people of God, and made him, Mardoché,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Assuere enhanced<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2783" id="noteref-2783" epub:type="noteref">1</a> for to be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is nothing in gree superlative<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2784" id="noteref-2784" epub:type="noteref">2</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>(As saith Senec) above a humble wife.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suffer thy wifë’s tongue, as Cato bit;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2785" id="noteref-2785" epub:type="noteref">3</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>She shall command, and thou shalt suffer it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet she will obey of courtesy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wife is keeper of thine husbandry:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well may the sickë man bewail and weep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There as there is no wife the house to keep.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I warnë thee, if wisely thou wilt wirch,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2786" id="noteref-2786" epub:type="noteref">4</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love well thy wife, as Christ loveth his church:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou lov’st thyself, if thou lovest thy wife.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No man hateth his flesh, but in his life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He fost’reth it; and therefore bid I thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cherish thy wife, or thou shalt never thé.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2787" id="noteref-2787" epub:type="noteref">5</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Husband and wife, what so men jape or play,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2788" id="noteref-2788" epub:type="noteref">6</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of worldly folk holdë the sicker<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2789" id="noteref-2789" epub:type="noteref">7</a> way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They be so knit there may no harm betide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And namëly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2790" id="noteref-2790" epub:type="noteref">8</a> upon the wifë’s side.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>For which this January, of whom I told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Consider’d hath within his dayës old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lusty life, the virtuous quiét,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is in marriágë honey-sweet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for his friends upon a day he sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tell them the effect of his intent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With facë sad,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2791" id="noteref-2791" epub:type="noteref">9</a> his tale he hath them told:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saidë, “Friendës, I am hoar and old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And almost (God wot) on my pittë’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2792" id="noteref-2792" epub:type="noteref">10</a> brink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon my soulë somewhat must I think.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have my body foolishly dispended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blessed be God that it shall be amended;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I will be certáin a wedded man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that anon in all the haste I can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto some maiden, fair and tender of age;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray you shapë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2793" id="noteref-2793" epub:type="noteref">11</a> for my marriáge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All suddenly, for I will not abide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I will fond<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2794" id="noteref-2794" epub:type="noteref">12</a> to éspy, on my side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom I may be wedded hastily.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But forasmuch as ye be more than I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye shallë rather<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2795" id="noteref-2795" epub:type="noteref">13</a> such a thing espy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than I, and where me best were to ally.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But one thing warn I you, my friendës dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will none old wife have in no mannére:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She shall not passë sixteen year certáin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old fish and youngë flesh would I have fain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Better,” quoth he, “a pike than a pickerel,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2796" id="noteref-2796" epub:type="noteref">14</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And better than old beef is tender veal.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will no woman thirty year of age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is but beanëstraw and great foráge.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke these oldë widows (God it wot)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They connë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2797" id="noteref-2797" epub:type="noteref">15</a> so much craft on Wadë’s boat,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2798" id="noteref-2798" epub:type="noteref">16</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>So muchë brookë harm<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2799" id="noteref-2799" epub:type="noteref">17</a> when that them lest,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2800" id="noteref-2800" epub:type="noteref">18</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That with them should I never live in rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For sundry schoolës makë subtle clerkës;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Woman of many schoolës half a clerk is.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But certainly a young thing men may guy,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2801" id="noteref-2801" epub:type="noteref">19</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right as men may warm wax with handës ply.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2802" id="noteref-2802" epub:type="noteref">20</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore I say you plainly in a clause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will none old wife have, right for this cause.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For if so were I haddë such mischance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I in her could havë no pleasance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then should I lead my life in avoutrie,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2803" id="noteref-2803" epub:type="noteref">21</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And go straight to the devil when I die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor children should I none upon her getten:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet were me lever<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2804" id="noteref-2804" epub:type="noteref">22</a> houndës had me eaten</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than that mine heritagë shouldë fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In strangë hands: and this I tell you all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I doubtë not I know the causë why</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men shouldë wed: and farthermore know I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There speaketh many a man of marriáge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That knows no more of it than doth my page,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For what causes a man should take a wife.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he ne may not livë chaste his life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take him a wife with great devotión,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because of lawful procreatión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of children, to th’ honoúr of God above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not only for paramour or love;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for they shouldë lechery eschew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yield their debtë when that it is due:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or for that each of them should help the other</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In mischief,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2805" id="noteref-2805" epub:type="noteref">23</a> as a sister shall the brother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And live in chastity full holily.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, Sirës, by your leave, that am not I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, God be thanked, I dare make avaunt,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2806" id="noteref-2806" epub:type="noteref">24</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I feel my limbës stark<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2807" id="noteref-2807" epub:type="noteref">25</a> and suffisant</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To do all that a man belongeth to:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wot myselfë best what I may do.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though I be hoar, I fare as doth a tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That blossoms ere the fruit y-waxen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2808" id="noteref-2808" epub:type="noteref">26</a> be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blossomy tree is neither dry nor dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I feel me now here hoar but on my head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine heart and all my limbës are as green</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As laurel through the year is for to seen.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2809" id="noteref-2809" epub:type="noteref">27</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, since that ye have heard all mine intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray you to my will ye would assent.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Diversë men diversëly him told</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of marriáge many examples old;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some blamed it, some praised it, certáin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But at the lastë, shortly for to sayn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(As all day<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2810" id="noteref-2810" epub:type="noteref">28</a> falleth altercatión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betwixtë friends in disputatión),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There fell a strife betwixt his brethren two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which that one was callëd Placebo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Justinus soothly callëd was that other.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Placebo said; “O January, brother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full little need have ye, my lord so dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Counsel to ask of any that is here:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that ye be so full of sapience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That you not liketh, for your high prudénce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To waivë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2811" id="noteref-2811" epub:type="noteref">1</a> from the word of Solomon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This word said he unto us every one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Work allë thing by counsel⁠—thus said he⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thennë shalt thou not repentë thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But though that Solomon spake such a word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine owen dearë brother and my lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So wisly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2812" id="noteref-2812" epub:type="noteref">2</a> God my soulë bring at rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hold your owen counsel is the best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, brother mine, take of me this motive;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2813" id="noteref-2813" epub:type="noteref">3</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have now been a court-man all my life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, God it wot, though I unworthy be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I havë standen in full great degree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aboutë lordës of full high estate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet had I ne’er with none of them debate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I never them contráried truëly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know well that my lord can<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2814" id="noteref-2814" epub:type="noteref">4</a> more than I;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What that he saith I hold it firm and stable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say the same, or else a thing sembláble.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A full great fool is any counsellor</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That serveth any lord of high honoúr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That dare presume, or onës thinken it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That his counsel should pass his lordë’s wit.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nay, lordës be no foolës by my fay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye have yourselfë shewed here to-day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So high senténce,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2815" id="noteref-2815" epub:type="noteref">5</a> so holily and well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I consent, and cónfirm every deal<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2816" id="noteref-2816" epub:type="noteref">6</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your wordës all, and your opinioún.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By God, there is no man in all this town</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor in Itále, could better have y-said:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Christ holds him of this counsel well apaid.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2817" id="noteref-2817" epub:type="noteref">7</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And truëly it is a high couráge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of any man that stopen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2818" id="noteref-2818" epub:type="noteref">8</a> is in age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To take a young wife, by my father’s kin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your heartë hangeth on a jolly pin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do now in this matter right as you lest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For finally I hold it for the best.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Justinus, that aye stillë sat and heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right in this wise to Placebo answér’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now, brother mine, be patient I pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since ye have said, and hearken what I say.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Senec, among his other wordës wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saith, that a man ought him right well advise,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2819" id="noteref-2819" epub:type="noteref">9</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom he gives his hand or his chattél.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And since I ought advisë me right well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom I give my good away from me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well more I ought advisë me, pardie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom I give my body: for alway</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I warn you well it is no childë’s play</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To take a wife without advisëment.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men must inquirë (this is mine assent)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whe’er she be wise, or sober, or dronkelew,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2820" id="noteref-2820" epub:type="noteref">10</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or proud, or any other ways a shrew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A chidester,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2821" id="noteref-2821" epub:type="noteref">11</a> or a waster of thy good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or rich or poor; or else a man is wood.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2822" id="noteref-2822" epub:type="noteref">12</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Albeit so, that no man findë shall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>None in this world, that trotteth whole in all,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2823" id="noteref-2823" epub:type="noteref">13</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>No man, nor beast, such as men can devise,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2824" id="noteref-2824" epub:type="noteref">14</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But nathehess it ought enough suffice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With any wife, if so were that she had</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More goodë thewës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2825" id="noteref-2825" epub:type="noteref">15</a> than her vices bad:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all this asketh leisure to inquére.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, God it wot, I have wept many a tear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full privily, since I have had a wife.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Praise whoso will a wedded mannë’s life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Certes, I find in it but cost and care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And observánces of all blisses bare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet, God wot, my neighëbours about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And namëly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2826" id="noteref-2826" epub:type="noteref">16</a> of women many a rout,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2827" id="noteref-2827" epub:type="noteref">17</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say that I have the mostë steadfast wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke the meekest one, that beareth life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I know best where wringeth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2828" id="noteref-2828" epub:type="noteref">18</a> me my shoe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye may for me right as you likë do.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Advisë you, ye be a man of age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How that ye enter into marriáge;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And namely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2829" id="noteref-2829" epub:type="noteref">16</a> with a young wife and a fair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By him that made water, fire, earth, air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The youngest man that is in all this rout<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2830" id="noteref-2830" epub:type="noteref">17</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is busy enough to bringen it about</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To have his wife alonë, trustë me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye shall not please her fully yearës three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is to say, to do her full pleasánce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wife asketh full many an observánce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray you that ye be not evil apaid.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2831" id="noteref-2831" epub:type="noteref">19</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Well,” quoth this January, “and hast thou said?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Straw for thy Senec, and for thy provérbs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I countë not a pannier full of herbs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of schoolë termës; wiser men than thou,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thou hast heard, assented here right now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To my purpose: Placebo, what say ye?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I say it is a cursed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2832" id="noteref-2832" epub:type="noteref">20</a> man,” quoth he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“That letteth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2833" id="noteref-2833" epub:type="noteref">21</a> matrimony, sickerly.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with that word they rise up suddenly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And be assented fully, that he should</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be wedded when him list, and where he would.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>High fantasy and curious business</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From day to day gan in the soul impress<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2834" id="noteref-2834" epub:type="noteref">22</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of January about his marriáge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many a fair shape, and many a fair viságe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There passed through his heartë night by night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As whoso took a mirror polish’d bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And set it in a common market-place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then should he see many a figure pace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By his mirrór; and in the samë wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gan January in his thought devise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of maidens, which that dweltë him beside:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wistë not where that he might abide.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2835" id="noteref-2835" epub:type="noteref">23</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For if that one had beauty in her face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another stood so in the people’s grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For her sadness<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2836" id="noteref-2836" epub:type="noteref">24</a> and her benignity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of the people greatest voice had she:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And some were rich and had a baddë name.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But natheless, betwixt earnest and game,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He at the last appointed him on one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let all others from his heartë gon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And chose her of his own authority;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For love is blind all day, and may not see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when that he was into bed y-brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He pourtray’d in his heart and in his thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her freshë beauty, and her agë tender,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her middle small, her armës long and slender,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her wisë governance, her gentleness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her womanly bearíng, and her sadnéss.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2837" id="noteref-2837" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when that he on her was condescended,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2838" id="noteref-2838" epub:type="noteref">2</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He thought his choicë might not be amended;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For when that he himself concluded had,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He thought each other mannë’s wit so bad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That impossíble it werë to reply</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against his choice; this was his fantasy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His friendës sent he to, at his instánce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And prayed them to do him that pleasánce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hastily they would unto him come;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would abridge their labour all and some:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Needed no more for them to go nor ride,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2839" id="noteref-2839" epub:type="noteref">3</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was appointed where he would abide.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2840" id="noteref-2840" epub:type="noteref">4</a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Placebo came, and eke his friendës soon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And alderfirst<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2841" id="noteref-2841" epub:type="noteref">5</a> he bade them all a boon,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2842" id="noteref-2842" epub:type="noteref">6</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That none of them no arguments would make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the purpose that he had y-take:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which purpose was pleasánt to God, said he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And very ground of his prosperity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said, there was a maiden in the town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which that of beauty haddë great renown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2843" id="noteref-2843" epub:type="noteref">7</a> were it so she were of small degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sufficed him her youth and her beautý;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which maid, he said, he would have to his wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lead in ease and holiness his life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thanked God, that he might have her all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That no wight with his blissë partë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2844" id="noteref-2844" epub:type="noteref">8</a> shall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And prayed them to labour in this need,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shape that he failë not to speed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For then, he said, his spirit was at ease.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Then is,” quoth he, “nothing may me displease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save one thing pricketh in my conscience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The which I will rehearse in your presénce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have,” quoth he, “heard said, full yore<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2845" id="noteref-2845" epub:type="noteref">9</a> ago,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There may no man have perfect blisses two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is to say, on earth and eke in heaven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For though he keep him from the sinnës seven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke from every branch of thilkë tree,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2846" id="noteref-2846" epub:type="noteref">10</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet is there so perfect felicity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so great ease and lust,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2847" id="noteref-2847" epub:type="noteref">11</a> in marriáge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ev’r I am aghast,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2848" id="noteref-2848" epub:type="noteref">12</a> now in mine age</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I shall head now so merry a life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So delicate, withoutë woe or strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I shall have mine heav’n on earthë here.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For since that very heav’n is bought so dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With tribulatión and great penánce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How should I then, living in such pleasánce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As allë wedded men do with their wivës,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come to the bliss where Christ etern on live is?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2849" id="noteref-2849" epub:type="noteref">13</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is my dread;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2850" id="noteref-2850" epub:type="noteref">14</a> and ye, my brethren tway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Assoilë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2851" id="noteref-2851" epub:type="noteref">15</a> me this question, I you pray.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Justinus, which that hated his follý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Answér’d anon right in his japery;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2852" id="noteref-2852" epub:type="noteref">16</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, for he would his longë tale abridge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wouldë no authority<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2853" id="noteref-2853" epub:type="noteref">17</a> allege,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But saidë; “Sir, so there be none obstácle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Other than this, God of his high mirácle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of his mercy, may so for you wirch,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2854" id="noteref-2854" epub:type="noteref">18</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, ere ye have your rights of holy church,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye may repent of wedded mannë’s life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which ye say there is no woe nor strife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ellës God forbid, but if<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2855" id="noteref-2855" epub:type="noteref">19</a> he sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wedded man his grace him to repent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well often, rather than a single man.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore, Sir, the bestë rede I can,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2856" id="noteref-2856" epub:type="noteref">20</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Despair you not, but have in your memóry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Paráventure she may be your purgatóry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She may be Goddë’s means, and Goddë’s whip;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then your soul shall up to heaven skip</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swifter than doth an arrow from a bow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hope to God hereafter ye shall know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That there is none so great felicity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In marriáge, nor ever more shall be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That you shall let<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2857" id="noteref-2857" epub:type="noteref">21</a> of your salvatión;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that ye use, as skill is and reasón,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lustës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2858" id="noteref-2858" epub:type="noteref">22</a> of your wife attemperly,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2859" id="noteref-2859" epub:type="noteref">23</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that ye please her not too amorously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that ye keep you eke from other sin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My tale is done, for my wit is but thin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be not aghast<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2860" id="noteref-2860" epub:type="noteref">12</a> hereof, my brother dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But let us waden out of this mattére,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Wife of Bath, if ye have understand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of marriáge, which ye have now in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Declared hath full well in little space;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fare ye now well, God have you in his grace.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And with this word this Justin’ and his brother</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have ta’en their leave, and each of them of other.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when they saw that it must needës be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They wroughtë so, by sleight and wise treatý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she, this maiden, which that Maius hight,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2861" id="noteref-2861" epub:type="noteref">24</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As hastily as ever that she might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall wedded be unto this Januáry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I trow it were too longë you to tarry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I told you of every script and band<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2862" id="noteref-2862" epub:type="noteref">25</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>By which she was feoffed in his hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or for to reckon of her rich array.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But finally y-comen is the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That to the churchë bothë be they went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For to receive the holy sacrament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forth came the priest, with stole about his neck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bade her be like Sarah and Rebecc’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In wisdom and in truth of marriáge;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said his orisons, as is uságe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And crouched<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2863" id="noteref-2863" epub:type="noteref">26</a> them, and bade<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2864" id="noteref-2864" epub:type="noteref">27</a> God should them bless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made all sicker<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2865" id="noteref-2865" epub:type="noteref">28</a> enough with holiness.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus be they wedded with solemnity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at the feastë sat both he and she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With other worthy folk, upon the dais.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All full of joy and bliss is the paláce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And full of instruments, and of vitáille,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mostë dainteous<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2866" id="noteref-2866" epub:type="noteref">29</a> of all Itále.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before them stood such instruments of soun’,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Orpheus, nor of Thebes Amphioún,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne madë never such a melody.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At every course came in loud minstrelsy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That never Joab trumped for to hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor he, Theodomas, yet half so clear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Thebes, when the city was in doubt.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bacchus the wine them skinked<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2867" id="noteref-2867" epub:type="noteref">1</a> all about.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Venus laughed upon every wight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(For January was become her knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wouldë both assayë his couráge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In liberty, and eke in marriáge),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with her firebrand in her hand about</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Danced before the bride and all the rout.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And certainly I dare right well say this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hyméneus, that god of wedding is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saw never his life so merry a wedded man.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hold thou thy peace, thou poet Marcian,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2868" id="noteref-2868" epub:type="noteref">2</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That writest us that ilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2869" id="noteref-2869" epub:type="noteref">3</a> wedding merry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of her Philology and him Mercúry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of the songës that the Muses sung;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too small is both thy pen, and eke thy tongue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For to describen of this marriáge.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When tender youth hath wedded stooping age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is such mirth that it may not be writ;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Assay it yourëself, then may ye wit<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2870" id="noteref-2870" epub:type="noteref">4</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that I lie or no in this mattére.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Maius, that sat with so benign a cheer,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2871" id="noteref-2871" epub:type="noteref">5</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her to behold it seemed faërie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Queen Esther never look’d with such an eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Assuere, so meek a look had she;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I may you not devise all her beauty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thus much of her beauty tell I may,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she was hike the bright morrow of May</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full filled of all beauty and pleasánce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This January is ravish’d in a trance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At every time he looked in her face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in his heart he gan her to menace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he that night in armës would her strain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Harder than ever Paris did Heléne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But natheless yet had he great pitý</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thilkë night offendë her must he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thought, “Alas, O tender creatúre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now wouldë God ye mightë well endure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All my couráge, it is so sharp and keen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am aghast<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2872" id="noteref-2872" epub:type="noteref">6</a> ye shall it not sustene.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But God forbid that I did all my might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now wouldë God that it were waxen night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that the night would lasten evermo’.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would that all this people were y-go.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2873" id="noteref-2873" epub:type="noteref">7</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And finally he did all his laboúr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he best mightë, saving his honoúr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To haste them from the meat in subtle wise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The timë came that reason was to rise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after that men dance, and drinkë fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And spices all about the house they cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And full of joy and bliss is every man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All but a squire, that hightë Damian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who carv’d before the knight full many a day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was so ravish’d on his lady May,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That for the very pain he was nigh wood;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2874" id="noteref-2874" epub:type="noteref">8</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Almost he swelt<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2875" id="noteref-2875" epub:type="noteref">9</a> and swooned where he stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So sore had Venus hurt him with her brand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As that she bare it dancing in her hand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to his bed he went him hastily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more of him as at this time speak I;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there I let him weep enough and plain,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2876" id="noteref-2876" epub:type="noteref">10</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till freshë May will rue upon his pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O perilous fire, that in the bedstraw breedeth!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O foe familiar,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2877" id="noteref-2877" epub:type="noteref">11</a> that his service bedeth!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2878" id="noteref-2878" epub:type="noteref">12</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>O servant traitor, O false homely hewe,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2879" id="noteref-2879" epub:type="noteref">13</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to the adder in bosom shy untrue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God shield us allë from your acquaintánce!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O January, drunken in pleasánce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of marriage, see how thy Damian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine owen squier and thy boren<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2880" id="noteref-2880" epub:type="noteref">14</a> man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Intendeth for to do thee villainy:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2881" id="noteref-2881" epub:type="noteref">15</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>God grantë thee thine homely foe<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2882" id="noteref-2882" epub:type="noteref">16</a> t’ espy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in this world is no worse pestilence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than homely foe, all day in thy presénce.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Performed hath the sun his arc diurn,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2883" id="noteref-2883" epub:type="noteref">17</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>No longer may the body of him sojourn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the horizon, in that latitude:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Night with his mantle, that is dark and rude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gan overspread the hemisphere about:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which departed is this lusty rout<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2884" id="noteref-2884" epub:type="noteref">18</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>From January, with thank on every side.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Home to their houses lustily they ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where as they do their thingës as them lest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when they see their time they go to rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon after that this hasty<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2885" id="noteref-2885" epub:type="noteref">19</a> Januáry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will go to bed, he will no longer tarry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He drankë hippocras, clarre,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2886" id="noteref-2886" epub:type="noteref">20</a> and vernage<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2887" id="noteref-2887" epub:type="noteref">21</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of spices hot, to increase his couráge;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many a lectuary had he full fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as the cursed monk Dan Constantine<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2888" id="noteref-2888" epub:type="noteref">22</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath written in his book <i xml:lang="la">de Coitu</i>;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To eat them all he would nothing eschew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to his privy friendës thus said he:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“For Goddë’s love, as soon as it may be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let voiden all this house in courteous wise.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they have done right as he will devise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men drinken, and the travers<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2889" id="noteref-2889" epub:type="noteref">23</a> draw anon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bride is brought to bed as still as stone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when the bed was with the priest y-bless’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of the chamber every wight him dress’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And January hath fast in arms y-take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His freshë May, his paradise, his make.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2890" id="noteref-2890" epub:type="noteref">24</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lulled her, he kissed her full oft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thickë bristles of his beard unsoft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to the skin of houndfish,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2891" id="noteref-2891" epub:type="noteref">1</a> sharp as brere<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2892" id="noteref-2892" epub:type="noteref">2</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>(For he was shav’n all new in his mannére),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He rubbed her upon her tender face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saidë thus; “Alas! I must trespace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To you, my spouse, and you greatly offend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere timë come that I will down descend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But natheless consider this,” quoth he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“There is no workman, whatsoe’er he be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That may both workë well and hastily:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This will be done at leisure perfectly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is no force<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2893" id="noteref-2893" epub:type="noteref">3</a> how longë that we play;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In true wedlock coupled be we tway;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And blessed be the yoke that we be in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in our actës may there be no sin.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A man may do no sinnë with his wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor hurt himselfë with his owen knife;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For we have leave to play us by the law.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus labour’d he, till that the day gan daw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then he took a sop in fine clarré,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And upright in his beddë then sat he.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after that he sang full loud and clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And kiss’d his wife, and madë wanton cheer.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was all coltish, full of ragerie<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2894" id="noteref-2894" epub:type="noteref">4</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And full of jargon as a flecked pie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The slackë skin about his neckë shaked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While that he sang, so chanted he and craked.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2895" id="noteref-2895" epub:type="noteref">5</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But God wot what that May thought in her heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When she him saw up sitting in his shirt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his night-cap, and with his neckë lean:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She praised not his playing worth a bean.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then said he thus; “My restë will I take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now day is come, I may no longer wake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And down he laid his head and slept till prime.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And afterward, when that he saw his time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up rosë January, but freshë May</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heldë her chamber till the fourthë day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As usage is of wivës for the best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For every labour some time must have rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ellës longë may he not endure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is to say, no life of creature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be it of fish, or bird, or beast, or man.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now will I speak of woeful Damian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That languisheth for love, as ye shall hear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore I speak to him in this mannére.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say. “O silly Damian, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Answér to this demand, as in this case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How shalt thou to thy lady, freshë May,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tellë thy woe? She will alway say nay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eke if thou speak, she will thy woe bewray;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2896" id="noteref-2896" epub:type="noteref">6</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>God be thine help, I can no better say.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This sickë Damian in Venus’ fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So burned that he diëd for desire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which he put his life in áventure,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2897" id="noteref-2897" epub:type="noteref">7</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>No longer might he in this wise endure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But privily a penner<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2898" id="noteref-2898" epub:type="noteref">8</a> gan he borrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in a letter wrote he all his sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In manner of a cómplaint or a lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto his fairë freshë lady May.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in a purse of silk, hung on his shirt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He hath it put, and laid it at his heart.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The moonë, that at noon was thilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2899" id="noteref-2899" epub:type="noteref">9</a> day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That January had wedded freshë May,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In ten of Taure, was into Cancer glided;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2900" id="noteref-2900" epub:type="noteref">10</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>So long had Maius in her chamber abided,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As custom is unto these nobles all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bridë shall not eaten in the hall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till dayës four, or three days at the least,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Y-passed be; then let her go to feast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fourthë day complete from noon to noon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that the highë massë was y-done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In hallë sat this January, and May,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As fresh as is the brightë summer’s day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so befell, how that this goodë man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remember’d him upon this Damian.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saidë; “Saint Marý, how may this be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Damian attendeth not to me?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is he aye sick? or how may this betide?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His squiërs, which that stoodë there beside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Excused him, because of his sickness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which letted<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2901" id="noteref-2901" epub:type="noteref">11</a> him to do his business:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>None other causë mightë make him tarry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“That me forthinketh,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2902" id="noteref-2902" epub:type="noteref">12</a> quoth this January,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“He is a gentle squiër, by my truth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that he died, it were great harm and ruth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is as wise, as díscreet, and secré,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2903" id="noteref-2903" epub:type="noteref">13</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As any man I know of his degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thereto manly and eke serviceáble,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for to be a thrifty man right able.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But after meat, as soon as ever I may</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will myself visit him, and eke May,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To do him all the comfort that I can.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for that word him blessed every man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That of his bounty and his gentleness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wouldë so comfórten in sickness</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His squiër, for it was a gentle deed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Dame,” quoth this January, “take good heed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At after meat, ye with your women all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(When that ye be in chamb’r out of this hall),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all ye go to see this Damian:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do him disport, he is a gentle man;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tellë him that I will him visíte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have I nothing but rested me a lite:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2904" id="noteref-2904" epub:type="noteref">14</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And speed you fastë, for I will abide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till that ye sleepë fastë by my side.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with that word he gan unto him call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A squiër, that was marshal of his hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And told him certain thingës that he wo’ld.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This freshë May hath straight her way y-hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all her women, unto Damian.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down by his beddë’s sidë sat she than,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2905" id="noteref-2905" epub:type="noteref">15</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Comfórting him as goodly as she may.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Damian, when that his time he say,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2906" id="noteref-2906" epub:type="noteref">16</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>In secret wise his purse, and eke his bill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which that he y-written had his will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath put into her hand withoutë more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save that he sighed wondrous deep and sore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And softëly to her right thus said he:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Mercy, and that ye not discover me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I am dead if that this thing be kid.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2907" id="noteref-2907" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pursë hath she in her bosom hid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And went her way; ye get no more of me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But unto January come is she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That on his beddë’s sidë sat full soft.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He took her, and he kissed her full oft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And laid him down to sleep, and that anon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She feigned her as that she mustë gon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There as ye know that every wight must need;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when she of this bill had taken heed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She rent it all to cloutës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2908" id="noteref-2908" epub:type="noteref">2</a> at the last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the privy softëly it cast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who studieth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2909" id="noteref-2909" epub:type="noteref">3</a> now but fairë freshë May?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adown by oldë January she lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That sleptë, till the cough had him awaked:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anon he pray’d her strippë her all naked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would of her, he said, have some pleasánce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said her clothës did him incumbránce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she obey’d him, be her lefe or loth.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2910" id="noteref-2910" epub:type="noteref">4</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, lest that precious<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2911" id="noteref-2911" epub:type="noteref">5</a> folk be with me wroth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How that he wrought I dare not to you tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or whether she thought it paradise or hell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there I let them worken in their wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till evensong ring, and they must arise.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Were it by destiny, or áventure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were it by influence, or by natúre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or constellation, that in such estate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heaven stood at that time fortunate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As for to put a bill of Venus’ works</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(For allë thing hath time, as say these clerks),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To any woman for to get her love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot say; but greatë God above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That knoweth that none act is causëless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He deem<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2912" id="noteref-2912" epub:type="noteref">6</a> of all, for I will hold my peace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But sooth is this, how that this freshë May</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath taken such impressión that day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of pity on this sickë Damian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That from her heartë she not drivë can</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The remembráncë for to do him ease.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2913" id="noteref-2913" epub:type="noteref">7</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Certain,” thought she, “whom that this thing displease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I reckë not, for here I him assure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To love him best of any creature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though he no morë haddë than his shirt.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, pity runneth soon in gentle heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here may ye see, how excellent franchise<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2914" id="noteref-2914" epub:type="noteref">8</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>In women is when they them narrow advise.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2915" id="noteref-2915" epub:type="noteref">9</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some tyrant is⁠—as there be many a one⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hath a heart as hard as any stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which would have let him sterven<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2916" id="noteref-2916" epub:type="noteref">10</a> in the place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well rather than have granted him her grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then rejoicen in her cruel pride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And reckon not to be a homicide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This gentle May, full filled of pitý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right of her hand a letter maked she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which she granted him her very grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There lacked nought, but only day and place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where that she might unto his lust suffice:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For it shall be right as he will devise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when she saw her time upon a day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To visit this Damían went this May,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And subtilly this letter down she thrust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under his pillow, read it if him lust.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She took him by the hand, and hard him twist’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So secretly, that no wight of it wist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bade him be all whole; and forth she went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To January, when he for her sent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up rosë Damian the nextë morrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All passed was his sickness and his sorrow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He combed him, he proined<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2917" id="noteref-2917" epub:type="noteref">11</a> him and picked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He did all that unto his lady liked;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke to January he went as low</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ever did a doggë for the bow.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2918" id="noteref-2918" epub:type="noteref">12</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is so pleasant unto every man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(For craft is all, whoso that do it can),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Every wight is fain to speak him good;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fully in his lady’s grace he stood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus leave I Damian about his need,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in my talë forth I will proceed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Some clerkës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2919" id="noteref-2919" epub:type="noteref">13</a> holdë that felicitý</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stands in delight; and therefore certain he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This noble January, with all his might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In honest wise as longeth to a knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shope<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2920" id="noteref-2920" epub:type="noteref">14</a> him to livë full deliciously:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His housing, his array, as honestly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2921" id="noteref-2921" epub:type="noteref">15</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To his degree was maked as a king’s.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amongës other of his honest things</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had a garden wallëd all with stone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fair a garden wot I nowhere none.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For out of doubt I verily suppose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he that wrote the Romance of the Rose<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2922" id="noteref-2922" epub:type="noteref">16</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could not of it the beauty well devise;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2923" id="noteref-2923" epub:type="noteref">17</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor Priapus<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2924" id="noteref-2924" epub:type="noteref">18</a> mightë not well suffice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though he be god of gardens, for to tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The beauty of the garden, and the well<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2925" id="noteref-2925" epub:type="noteref">19</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That stood under a laurel always green.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full often time he, Pluto, and his queen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proserpina, and all their faërie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disported them and madë melody</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About that well, and danced, as men told.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This noble knight, this January old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such dainty<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2926" id="noteref-2926" epub:type="noteref">20</a> had in it to walk and play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he would suffer no wight to bear the key,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save he himself, for of the small wickét</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He bare always of silver a clikét,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2927" id="noteref-2927" epub:type="noteref">21</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which, when that him list, he it unshet.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2928" id="noteref-2928" epub:type="noteref">22</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when that he would pay his wifë’s debt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In summer season, thither would he go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And May his wife, and no wight but they two;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thingës which that were not done in bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He in the garden them perform’d and sped.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in this wisë many a merry day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lived this January and fresh May,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But worldly joy may not always endure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To January, nor to no creatúre.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O sudden hap! O thou fortúne unstable!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to the scorpión so deceiváble,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2929" id="noteref-2929" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That fhatt’rest with thy head when thou wilt sting;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy tail is death, through thine envenoming.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O brittle joy! O sweetë poison quaint!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2930" id="noteref-2930" epub:type="noteref">2</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>O monster, that so subtilly canst paint</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy giftës, under hue of steadfastness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thou deceivest bothë more and less!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2931" id="noteref-2931" epub:type="noteref">3</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why hast thou January thus deceiv’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That haddest him for thy full friend receiv’d?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now thou hast bereft him both his eyen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For sorrow of which desireth he to dien.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! this noble January free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid his lust<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2932" id="noteref-2932" epub:type="noteref">4</a> and his prosperity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is waxen blind, and that all suddenly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He weeped and he wailed piteously;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therewithal the fire of jealousy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Lest that his wife should fall in some follý)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So burnt his heartë, that he wouldë fain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That some man bothë him and her had slain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For neither after his death, nor in his life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne would he that she were no love nor wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ever live as widow in clothës black,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sole as the turtle that hath lost her make.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2933" id="noteref-2933" epub:type="noteref">5</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But at the last, after a month or tway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His sorrow gan assuagë, sooth to say.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, when he wist it might none other be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He patiently took his adversity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save out of doubtë he may not foregon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he was jealous evermore-in-one:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2934" id="noteref-2934" epub:type="noteref">6</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which jealousy was so outrageoús,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That neither in hall, nor in none other house,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor in none other place never the mo’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wouldë suffer her to ride or go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2935" id="noteref-2935" epub:type="noteref">7</a> that he had hand on her alway.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which full often weptë freshë May,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That loved Damian so burningly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she must either dien suddenly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ellës she must have him as her lest:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2936" id="noteref-2936" epub:type="noteref">8</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>She waited<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2937" id="noteref-2937" epub:type="noteref">9</a> when her heartë wouldë brest.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2938" id="noteref-2938" epub:type="noteref">10</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon that other sidë Damian</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Becomen is the sorrowfullest man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ever was; for neither night nor day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He mightë speak a word to freshë May,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As to his purpose, of no such mattére,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2939" id="noteref-2939" epub:type="noteref">7</a> that January must it hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That had a hand upon her evermo’.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But natheless, by writing to and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And privy signës, wist he what she meant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she knew eke the fine<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2940" id="noteref-2940" epub:type="noteref">11</a> of his intent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O January, what might it thee avail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though thou might see as far as shippës sail?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For as good is it blind deceiv’d to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As be deceived when a man may see.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, Argus, which that had a hundred eyen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all that ever he could pore or pryen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet was he blent;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2941" id="noteref-2941" epub:type="noteref">12</a> and, God wot, so be mo’,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That weenë wisly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2942" id="noteref-2942" epub:type="noteref">13</a> that it be not so:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pass over is an ease, I say no more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This freshë May, of which I spakë yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In warm wax hath imprinted the clikét<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2943" id="noteref-2943" epub:type="noteref">14</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That January bare of the small wickét</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By which into his garden oft he went;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Damian, that knew all her intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cliket counterfeited privily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no more to say, but hastily</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some wonder by this cliket shall betide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which ye shall hearen, if ye will abide.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>O noble Ovid, sooth say’st thou, God wot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What sleight is it, if love be long and hot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he’ll not find it out in some mannére?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Pyramus and Thisbe may men lear;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2944" id="noteref-2944" epub:type="noteref">15</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though they were kept full long and strait o’er all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They be accorded,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2945" id="noteref-2945" epub:type="noteref">16</a> rowning<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2946" id="noteref-2946" epub:type="noteref">17</a> through a wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where no wight could have found out such a sleight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now to purpose; ere that dayës eight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were passed of the month of July, fill<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2947" id="noteref-2947" epub:type="noteref">18</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That January caught so great a will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through egging<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2948" id="noteref-2948" epub:type="noteref">19</a> of his wife, him for to play</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his gardén, and no wight but they tway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in a morning to this May said he:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Rise up, my wife, my love, my lady free;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The turtle’s voice is heard, mine owen sweet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The winter is gone, with all his rainës weet.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2949" id="noteref-2949" epub:type="noteref">20</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come forth now with thine eyen columbine.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2950" id="noteref-2950" epub:type="noteref">21</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well fairer be thy breasts than any wine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The garden is enclosed all about;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come forth, my whitë spouse; for, out of doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast me wounded in mine heart, O wife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No spot in thee was e’er in all thy life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come forth, and let us taken our disport;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I choose thee for my wife and my comfórt.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such oldë lewëd wordës used he.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Damian a signë madë she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he should go beforë with his cliket.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Damian then hath opened the wicket,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in he start, and that in such mannére</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That no wight might him either see or hear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still he sat under a bush. Anon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This January, as blind as is a stone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Maius in his hand, and no wight mo’,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into this freshë garden is y-go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And clapped to the wicket suddenly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now, wife,” quoth he, “here is but thou and I;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou art the creature that I bestë love:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, by that Lord that sits in heav’n above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lever<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2951" id="noteref-2951" epub:type="noteref">22</a> I had to dien on a knife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than thee offendë, dearë truë wife.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Goddë’s sakë, think how I thee chees,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2952" id="noteref-2952" epub:type="noteref">23</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not for no covetisë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2953" id="noteref-2953" epub:type="noteref">24</a> doubtëless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But only for the love I had to thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though that I be old, and may not see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be to me true, and I will tell you why.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Certes three thingës shall ye win thereby:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First, love of Christ, and to yourself honoúr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all mine heritagë, town and tow’r.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I give it you, make charters as you lest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This shall be done to-morrow ere sun rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So wisly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2954" id="noteref-2954" epub:type="noteref">1</a> God my soulë bring to bliss!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray you, on this covenant me kiss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though that I be jealous, wite<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2955" id="noteref-2955" epub:type="noteref">2</a> me not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye be so deep imprinted in my thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That when that I consider your beautý,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therewithal th’ unlikely<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2956" id="noteref-2956" epub:type="noteref">3</a> eld of me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I may not, certes, though I shouldë die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forbear to be out of your company,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For very love; this is withoutë doubt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now kiss me, wife, and let us roam about.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This freshë May, when she these wordës heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Benignëly to January answér’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But first and forward she began to weep:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I have,” quoth she, “a soulë for to keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As well as ye, and also mine honoúr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of my wifehood thilkë tender flow’r</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which that I have assured in your hond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that the priest to you my body bond:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherefore I will answer in this mannére,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With leave of you mine owen lord so dear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray to God, that never dawn the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I ne sterve,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2957" id="noteref-2957" epub:type="noteref">4</a> as foul as woman may,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If e’er I do unto my kin that shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ellës I impairë so my name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I be false; and if I do that lack,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2958" id="noteref-2958" epub:type="noteref">5</a> strippë me, and put me in a sack,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the nextë river do<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2959" id="noteref-2959" epub:type="noteref">5</a> me drench:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2960" id="noteref-2960" epub:type="noteref">6</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am a gentle woman, and no wench.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why speak ye thus? but men be e’er untrue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And women have reproof of you aye new.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye know none other dalliance, I believe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But speak to us of untrust and repreve.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2961" id="noteref-2961" epub:type="noteref">7</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with that word she saw where Damian</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sat in the bush, and coughë she began;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with her finger signë madë she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Damian should climb upon a tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That charged was with fruit; and up he went:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For verily he knew all her intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every signë that she couldë make,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Better than January her own make.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2962" id="noteref-2962" epub:type="noteref">8</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For in a letter she had told him all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this mattér, how that he workë shall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus I leave him sitting in the perry,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2963" id="noteref-2963" epub:type="noteref">9</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And January and May roaming full merry.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Bright was the day, and blue the firmament;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Phoebus of gold his streamës down had sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To gladden every flow’r with his warmnéss;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was that time in Geminis, I guess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But little from his declinatión</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Cancer, Jovë’s exaltatión.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so befell, in that bright morning-tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in the garden, on the farther side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pluto, that is the king of Faërie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And many a lady in his company</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Following his wife, the queen Proserpina⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which that he ravished out of Ethna,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2964" id="noteref-2964" epub:type="noteref">10</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>While that she gather’d flowers in the mead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(In Claudian ye may the story read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How in his grisly chariot he her fet)⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2965" id="noteref-2965" epub:type="noteref">11</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>This king of Faërie adown him set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a bank of turfës fresh and green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And right anon thus said he to his queen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My wife,” quoth he, “there may no wight say nay⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2966" id="noteref-2966" epub:type="noteref">12</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Experience so proves it every day⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The treason which that woman doth to man.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ten hundred thousand stories tell I can</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Notáble of your untruth and brittleness.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2967" id="noteref-2967" epub:type="noteref">13</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Solomon, richest of all richéss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full fill’d of sapience and worldly glory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full worthy be thy wordës of memóry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To every wight that wit and reason can.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2968" id="noteref-2968" epub:type="noteref">14</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus praised he yet the bounté<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2969" id="noteref-2969" epub:type="noteref">15</a> of man:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Among a thousand men yet found I one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But of all women found I never none.’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2970" id="noteref-2970" epub:type="noteref">16</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus said this king, that knew your wickedness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Jesus, <i xml:lang="la">Filius</i> Sirach,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2971" id="noteref-2971" epub:type="noteref">17</a> as I guess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He spake of you but seldom reverénce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wildë fire and córrupt pestilence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fall upon your bodies yet to-night!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne see ye not this honourable knight?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because, alas! that he is blind and old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His owen man shall makë him cuckóld.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, where he sits, the lechour, in the tree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now will I granten, of my majesty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto this oldë blindë worthy knight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he shall have again his eyen sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When that his wife will do him villainy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then shall be knowen all her harlotry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both in reproof of her and other mo’.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Yea, Sir,” quoth Proserpine, “and will ye so?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now by my mother Ceres’ soul I swear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I shall give her suffisant answér,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And allë women after, for her sake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That though they be in any guilt y-take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With facë bold they shall themselves excuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bear them down that wouldë them accuse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For lack of answer, none of them shall dien.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2972" id="noteref-2972" epub:type="noteref">18</a> had ye seen a thing with both your eyen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet shall we visage it<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2973" id="noteref-2973" epub:type="noteref">19</a> so hardily,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And weep, and swear, and chidë subtilly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ye shall be as lewëd<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2974" id="noteref-2974" epub:type="noteref">20</a> as be geese.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What recketh me of your authorities?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wot well that this Jew, this Solomon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Found of us women foolës many one:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But though that he foundë no good womán,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet there hath found many another man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Women full good, and true, and virtuoús;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Witness on them that dwelt in Christë’s house;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With martyrdom they proved their constánce.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Roman gestës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2975" id="noteref-2975" epub:type="noteref">1</a> makë remembránce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of many a very truë wife also.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, Sirë, be not wroth, albeit so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though that he said he found no good womán,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray you take the sentence<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2976" id="noteref-2976" epub:type="noteref">2</a> of the man:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He meant thus, that in sovereign bounté<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2977" id="noteref-2977" epub:type="noteref">3</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is none but God, no, neither he nor she.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2978" id="noteref-2978" epub:type="noteref">4</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hey, for the very God that is but one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why makë ye so much of Solomon?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What though he made a temple, Goddë’s house?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What though he werë rich and glorioús?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So made he eke a temple of false goddës;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How might he do a thing that more forbode<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2979" id="noteref-2979" epub:type="noteref">5</a> is?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pardie, as fair as ye his name emplaster,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2980" id="noteref-2980" epub:type="noteref">6</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was a lechour, and an idolaster,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2981" id="noteref-2981" epub:type="noteref">7</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his eld he very<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2982" id="noteref-2982" epub:type="noteref">8</a> God forsook.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if that God had not (as saith the book)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spared him for his father’s sake, he should</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have lost his regnë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2983" id="noteref-2983" epub:type="noteref">9</a> rather<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2984" id="noteref-2984" epub:type="noteref">10</a> than he would.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I settë not, of<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2985" id="noteref-2985" epub:type="noteref">11</a> all the villainy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he of women wrote, a butterfly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am a woman, needës must I speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ellës swell until mine heartë break.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For since he said that we be jangleresses,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2986" id="noteref-2986" epub:type="noteref">12</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ever may I brookë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2987" id="noteref-2987" epub:type="noteref">13</a> whole my tresses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall not spare for no courtesy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To speak him harm, that said us villainy.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Dame,” quoth this Pluto, “be no longer wroth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I give it up: but, since I swore mine oath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I would grant to him his sight again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My word shall stand, that warn I you certáin:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am a king, it sits<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2988" id="noteref-2988" epub:type="noteref">14</a> me not to lie.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“And I,” quoth she, “am queen of Faërie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her answer she shall have, I undertake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us no morë wordës of it make.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forsooth, I will no longer you contráry.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now let us turn again to January,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That in the garden with his fairë May</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Singeth well merrier than the popinjay:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2989" id="noteref-2989" epub:type="noteref">15</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“You love I best, and shall, and other none.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So long about the alleys is he gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till he was comë to that ilkë perry,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2990" id="noteref-2990" epub:type="noteref">16</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where as this Damian sattë full merry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On high, among the freshë leavës green.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This freshë May, that is so bright and sheen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gan for to sigh, and said, “Alas my side!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, Sir,” quoth she, “for aught that may betide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I must have of the pearës that I see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or I must die, so sorë longeth me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To eaten of the smallë pearës green;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Help, for her love that is of heaven queen!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I tell you well, a woman in my plight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May have to fruit so great an appetite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she may dien, but<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2991" id="noteref-2991" epub:type="noteref">17</a> she of it have.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Alas!” quoth he, “that I had here a knave<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2992" id="noteref-2992" epub:type="noteref">18</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That couldë climb; alas! alas!” quoth he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“For I am blind.” “Yea, Sir, no force,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2993" id="noteref-2993" epub:type="noteref">19</a> quoth she;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“But would ye vouchësafe, for Goddë’s sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The perry in your armës for to take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(For well I wot that ye mistrustë me),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then would I climbë well enough,” quoth she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“So I my foot might set upon your back.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Certes,” said he, “therein shall be no lack,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might I you helpë with mine heartë’s blood.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He stooped down, and on his back she stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And caught her by a twist,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2994" id="noteref-2994" epub:type="noteref">20</a> and up she go’th.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Ladies, I pray you that ye be not wroth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot glose,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2995" id="noteref-2995" epub:type="noteref">21</a> I am a rudë man):</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And suddenly anon this Damian</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gan pullen up the smock, and in he throng.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2996" id="noteref-2996" epub:type="noteref">22</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when that Pluto saw this greatë wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To January he gave again his sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made him see as well as ever he might.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when he thus had caught his sight again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was never man of anything so fain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But on his wife his thought was evermo’.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up to the tree he cast his eyen two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saw how Damian his wife had dress’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In such mannére, it may not be express’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2997" id="noteref-2997" epub:type="noteref">23</a> I wouldë speak uncourteously.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And up he gave a roaring and a cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As doth the mother when the child shall die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Out! help! alas! harow!” he gan to cry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O strongë, lady, stowre!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2998" id="noteref-2998" epub:type="noteref">24</a> what doest thou?”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And she answered: “Sir, what aileth you?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have patience and reason in your mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have you help’d on both your eyen blind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On peril of my soul, I shall not lien,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As me was taught to helpë with your eyen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was nothing better for to make you see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than struggle with a man upon a tree:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God wot, I did it in full good intent.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Struggle!” quoth he, “yea, algate in it went.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God give you both one shamë’s death to dien!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He swived thee; I saw it with mine eyen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ellës be I hanged by the halse.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2999" id="noteref-2999" epub:type="noteref">25</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Then is,” quoth she, “my medicine all false;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For certainly, if that ye mightë see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye would not say these wordës unto me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye have some glimpsing,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3000" id="noteref-3000" epub:type="noteref">26</a> and no perfect sight.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I see,” quoth he, “as well as ever I might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Thanked be God!) with both mine eyen two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by my faith me thought he did thee so.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ye maze, ye mazë,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3001" id="noteref-3001" epub:type="noteref">27</a> goodë Sir,” quoth she;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“This thank have I for I have made you see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas!” quoth she, “that e’er I was so kind.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now, Dame,” quoth he, “let all pass out of mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come down, my lefe,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3002" id="noteref-3002" epub:type="noteref">1</a> and if I have missaid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God help me so, as I am evil apaid.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3003" id="noteref-3003" epub:type="noteref">2</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, by my father’s soul, I ween’d have seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How that this Damian had by thee lain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that thy smock had lain upon his breast.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Yea, Sir,” quoth she, “ye may ween as ye lest:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3004" id="noteref-3004" epub:type="noteref">3</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, Sir, a man that wakes out of his sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He may not suddenly well takë keep<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3005" id="noteref-3005" epub:type="noteref">4</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon a thing, nor see it perfectly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till that he be adawed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3006" id="noteref-3006" epub:type="noteref">5</a> verily.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right so a man, that long hath blind y-be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He may not suddenly so well y-see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First when his sight is newë come again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he that hath a day or two y-seen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till that your sight establish’d be a while,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There may full many a sightë you beguile.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beware, I pray you, for, by heaven’s king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full many a man weeneth to see a thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And it is all another than it seemeth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He which that misconceiveth oft misdeemeth.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3007" id="noteref-3007" epub:type="noteref">6</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with that word she leapt down from the tree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This January, who is glad but he?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He kissed her, and clipped<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3008" id="noteref-3008" epub:type="noteref">7</a> her full oft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on her womb he stroked her full soft;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to his palace home he hath her lad.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3009" id="noteref-3009" epub:type="noteref">8</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, goodë men, I pray you to be glad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus endeth here my tale of Januáry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God bless us, and his mother, Saintë Mary.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
