<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Squire’s Tale</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="the-squires-tale" epub:type="division z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Squire’s Tale</h2>
			<section id="the-squires-tale-prologue" epub:type="prologue">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Prologue</h3>
				<p>
					<span>“Hey! Goddë’s mercy!” said our Hostë tho,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3010" id="noteref-3010" epub:type="noteref">3010</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Now such a wife I pray God keep me fro’.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo, suchë sleightës and subtilities</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In women be; for aye as busy as bees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are they us silly men for to deceive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the soothë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3011" id="noteref-3011" epub:type="noteref">3011</a> will they ever weive,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3012" id="noteref-3012" epub:type="noteref">3012</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As this Merchantë’s tale it proveth well.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But natheless, as true as any steel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have a wife, though that she poorë be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But of her tongue a labbing<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3013" id="noteref-3013" epub:type="noteref">3013</a> shrew is she;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3014" id="noteref-3014" epub:type="noteref">3014</a> she hath a heap of vices mo’.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thereof no force;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3015" id="noteref-3015" epub:type="noteref">3015</a> let all such thingës go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But wit<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3016" id="noteref-3016" epub:type="noteref">3016</a> ye what? in counsel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3017" id="noteref-3017" epub:type="noteref">3017</a> be it said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Me rueth sore I am unto her tied;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, an’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3018" id="noteref-3018" epub:type="noteref">3018</a> I shouldë reckon every vice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which that she hath, y-wis<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3019" id="noteref-3019" epub:type="noteref">3019</a> I were too nice;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3020" id="noteref-3020" epub:type="noteref">3020</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And causë why, it should reported be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And told her by some of this companý</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(By whom, it needeth not for to declare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since women connen utter such chaffáre),<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3021" id="noteref-3021" epub:type="noteref">3021</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And eke my wit sufficeth not thereto</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To tellen all; wherefore my tale is do.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3022" id="noteref-3022" epub:type="noteref">3022</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Squiër, come near, if it your willë be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And say somewhat of love, for certes ye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Connë thereon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3023" id="noteref-3023" epub:type="noteref">3023</a> as much as any man.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nay, Sir,” quoth he; “but such thing as I can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With hearty will⁠—for I will not rebel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against your lust,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3024" id="noteref-3024" epub:type="noteref">3024</a>⁠—a tale will I tell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have me excused if I speak amiss;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My will is good; and lo, my tale is this.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="the-squires-tale-body" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Tale<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3025" id="noteref-3025" epub:type="noteref">3025</a></h3>
				<section id="the-squires-tale-body-1" epub:type="part">
					<h4 xml:lang="la">
						<span epub:type="label">Pars</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal">Prima</span>
					</h4>
					<p>
						<span>At Sarra, in the land of Tartary,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There dwelt a king that warrayed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3026" id="noteref-3026" epub:type="noteref">3026</a> Russie,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through which there died many a doughty man;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This noble king was called Cambuscan,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3027" id="noteref-3027" epub:type="noteref">3027</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which in his time was of so great renown,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That there was nowhere in no regioún</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So excellent a lord in allë thing:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Him lacked nought that longeth to a king,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As of the sect of which that he was born.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He kept his law to which he was y-sworn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And thereto<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3028" id="noteref-3028" epub:type="noteref">3028</a> he was hardy, wise, and rich,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And piteous and just, always y-lich;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3029" id="noteref-3029" epub:type="noteref">3029</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>True of his word, benign and honouráble;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of his coráge as any centre stable;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3030" id="noteref-3030" epub:type="noteref">3030</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Young, fresh, and strong, in armës desiroús</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As any bachelor of all his house.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A fair persón he was, and fortunate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And kept alway so well his royal estate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That there was nowhere such another man.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This noble king, this Tartar Cambuscan,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Haddë two sons by Elfeta his wife,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of which the eldest hightë Algarsife,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The other was y-callëd Camballó.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A daughter had this worthy king also,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That youngest was, and hightë Canacé:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But for to tellë you all her beautý,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It lies not in my tongue, nor my conníng;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3031" id="noteref-3031" epub:type="noteref">3031</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>I dare not undertake so high a thing:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mine English eke is insufficient,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It mustë be a rhetor<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3032" id="noteref-3032" epub:type="noteref">3032</a> excellent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That couth his colours longing for that art,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3033" id="noteref-3033" epub:type="noteref">3033</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>If he should her describen any part;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I am none such, I must speak as I can.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And so befell, that when this Cambuscan</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Had twenty winters borne his diadem,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As he was wont from year to year, I deem,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He let the feast of his nativity</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Do cryë,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3034" id="noteref-3034" epub:type="noteref">3034</a> throughout Sarra his citý,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The last Idus of March, after the year.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Phoebus the sun full jolly was and clear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For he was nigh his exaltatión</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In Martë’s face, and in his mansión<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3035" id="noteref-3035" epub:type="noteref">3035</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>In Aries, the choleric hot sign:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Full lusty<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3036" id="noteref-3036" epub:type="noteref">3036</a> was the weather and benign;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For which the fowls against the sunnë sheen,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3037" id="noteref-3037" epub:type="noteref">3037</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>What for the season and the youngë green,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Full loudë sangë their affectións:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Them seemed to have got protectións</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Against the sword of winter keen and cold.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This Cambuscan, of which I have you told,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In royal vesture, sat upon his dais,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With diadem, full high in his palace;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And held his feast so solemn and so rich,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That in this worldë was there none it lich.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3038" id="noteref-3038" epub:type="noteref">3038</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of which if I should tell all the array,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then would it occupy a summer’s day;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And eke it needeth not for to devise<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3039" id="noteref-3039" epub:type="noteref">3039</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>At every course the order of servíce.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I will not tellen of their strangë sewes,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3040" id="noteref-3040" epub:type="noteref">3040</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor of their swannës, nor their heronsews.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3041" id="noteref-3041" epub:type="noteref">3041</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Eke in that land, as tellë knightës old,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There is some meat that is full dainty hold,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That in this land men reck of<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3042" id="noteref-3042" epub:type="noteref">3042</a> it full small:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There is no man that may reporten all.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I will not tarry you, for it is prime,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And for it is no fruit, but loss of time;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unto my purpose<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3043" id="noteref-3043" epub:type="noteref">3043</a> I will have recourse.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And so befell that, after the third course,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While that this king sat thus in his nobley,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3044" id="noteref-3044" epub:type="noteref">3044</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hearing his ministrelës their thingës play</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before him at his board deliciously,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In at the hallë door all suddenly</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There came a knight upon a steed of brass,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in his hand a broad mirrór of glass;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon his thumb he had of gold a ring,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And by his side a naked sword hangíng:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And up he rode unto the highë board.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In all the hall was there not spoke a word,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For marvel of this knight; him to behold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Full busily they waited,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3045" id="noteref-3045" epub:type="noteref">3045</a> young and old.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>This strangë knight, that came thus suddenly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All armed, save his head, full richëly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Saluted king, and queen, and lordës all,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By order as they satten in the hall,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With so high reverence and óbservánce,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As well in speech as in his countenánce,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That Gawain<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3046" id="noteref-3046" epub:type="noteref">3046</a> with his oldë courtesý,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though he were come again out of Faerie,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Him couldë not amendë with a word.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3047" id="noteref-3047" epub:type="noteref">3047</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And after this, before the highë board,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He with a manly voice said his messáge,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>After the form used in his languáge,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Withoutë vice<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3048" id="noteref-3048" epub:type="noteref">3048</a> of syllable or letter.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, for his talë shouldë seem the better,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Accordant to his wordës was his cheer,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3049" id="noteref-3049" epub:type="noteref">3049</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>As teacheth art of speech them that it lear.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3050" id="noteref-3050" epub:type="noteref">3050</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Albeit that I cannot sound his style,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor cannot climb over so high a stile,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet say I this, as to commúne intent,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3051" id="noteref-3051" epub:type="noteref">3051</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thus much amounteth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3052" id="noteref-3052" epub:type="noteref">3052</a> all that ever he meant,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If it so be that I have it in mind.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>He said; “The king of Araby and Ind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My liegë lord, on this solemnë day</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Saluteth you as he best can and may,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And sendeth you, in honour of your feast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By me, that am all ready at your hest,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3053" id="noteref-3053" epub:type="noteref">3053</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>This steed of brass, that easily and well</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Can in the space of one day naturel</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(This is to say, in four-and-twenty hours),</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whereso you list, in drought or else in show’rs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bearë your body into every place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To which your heartë willeth for to pace,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3054" id="noteref-3054" epub:type="noteref">3054</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Withoutë wem<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3055" id="noteref-3055" epub:type="noteref">3055</a> of you, through foul or fair.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or if you list to fly as high in air</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As doth an eagle, when him list to soar,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This samë steed shall bear you evermore</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Withoutë harm, till ye be where you lest<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3056" id="noteref-3056" epub:type="noteref">3056</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>(Though that ye sleepen on his back, or rest),</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And turn again, with writhing<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3057" id="noteref-3057" epub:type="noteref">3057</a> of a pin.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He that it wrought, he coudë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3058" id="noteref-3058" epub:type="noteref">3058</a> many a gin;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3059" id="noteref-3059" epub:type="noteref">3059</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>He waited<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3060" id="noteref-3060" epub:type="noteref">3060</a> in any a constellatión,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ere he had done this operatión,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And knew full many a seal<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3061" id="noteref-3061" epub:type="noteref">3061</a> and many a bond.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This mirror eke, that I have in mine hond,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hath such a might, that men may in it see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When there shall fall any adversitý</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unto your realm, or to yourself also,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And openly who is your friend or foe.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And over all this, if any lady bright</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hath set her heart on any manner wight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If he be false, she shall his treason see,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His newë love, and all his subtlety,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So openly that there shall nothing hide.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wherefore, against this lusty summer-tide,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This mirror, and this ring that ye may see,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He hath sent to my lady Canacé,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Your excellentë daughter that is here.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The virtue of this ring, if ye will hear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is this, that if her list it for to wear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon her thumb, or in her purse it bear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There is no fowl that flyeth under heaven,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That she shall not well understand his steven,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3062" id="noteref-3062" epub:type="noteref">3062</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And know his meaning openly and plain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And answer him in his languáge again:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And every grass that groweth upon root</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She shall eke know, to whom it will do boot,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3063" id="noteref-3063" epub:type="noteref">3063</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>All be his woundës ne’er so deep and wide.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This naked sword, that hangeth by my side,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such virtue hath, that what man that it smite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Throughout his armour it will carve and bite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Were it as thick as is a branched oak:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And what man is y-wounded with the stroke</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Shall ne’er be whole, till that you list, of grace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To stroke him with the flat in thilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3064" id="noteref-3064" epub:type="noteref">3064</a> place</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where he is hurt; this is as much to sayn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ye mustë with the flattë sword again</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stroke him upon the wound, and it will close.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This is the very sooth, withoutë glose;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3065" id="noteref-3065" epub:type="noteref">3065</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>It faileth not, while it is in your hold.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And when this knight had thus his talë told,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He rode out of the hall, and down he light.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His steedë, which that shone as sunnë bright,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Stood in the court as still as any stone.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The knight is to his chamber led anon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And is unarmed, and to meat y-set.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3066" id="noteref-3066" epub:type="noteref">3066</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>These presents be full richëly y-fet⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3067" id="noteref-3067" epub:type="noteref">3067</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>This is to say, the sword and the mirroúr⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And borne anon into the highë tow’r,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With certain officers ordain’d therefor;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And unto Canacé the ring is bore</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Solemnëly, where she sat at the table;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But sickerly, withouten any fable,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The horse of brass, that may not be remued.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3068" id="noteref-3068" epub:type="noteref">3068</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>It stood as it were to the ground y-glued;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There may no man out of the place it drive</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For no engíne of windlass or polive;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3069" id="noteref-3069" epub:type="noteref">3069</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And causë why, for they can not the craft;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3070" id="noteref-3070" epub:type="noteref">3070</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And therefore in the place they have it laft,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till that the knight hath taught them the mannére</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To voidë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3071" id="noteref-3071" epub:type="noteref">3071</a> him, as ye shall after hear.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Great was the press, that swarmed to and fro</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To gauren<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3072" id="noteref-3072" epub:type="noteref">3072</a> on this horse that stoodë so:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For it so high was, and so broad and long,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So well proportioned for to be strong,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Right as it were a steed of Lombardy;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Therewith so horsely, and so quick of eye,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As it a gentle Poileis<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3073" id="noteref-3073" epub:type="noteref">3073</a> courser were:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For certes, from his tail unto his ear</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nature nor art ne could him not amend</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In no degree, as all the people wend.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3074" id="noteref-3074" epub:type="noteref">3074</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>But evermore their mostë wonder was</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How that it couldë go, and was of brass;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It was of Faerie, as the people seem’d.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Diverse folk diversëly they deem’d;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As many heads, as many wittës been.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They murmured, as doth a swarm of been,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3075" id="noteref-3075" epub:type="noteref">3075</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And madë skills<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3076" id="noteref-3076" epub:type="noteref">3076</a> after their fantasies,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rehearsing of the oldë poetries,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And said that it was like the Pegasé,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3077" id="noteref-3077" epub:type="noteref">3077</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>The horse that haddë wingës for to flee;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or else it was the Greekë’s horse Sinon,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3078" id="noteref-3078" epub:type="noteref">3078</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>That broughtë Troyë to destructión,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As men may in the oldë gestës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3079" id="noteref-3079" epub:type="noteref">3079</a> read.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Mine heart,” quoth one, “is evermore in dread;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I trow some men of armës be therein,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That shapë them<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3080" id="noteref-3080" epub:type="noteref">3080</a> this city for to win:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It were right good that all such thing were know.”</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Another rowned<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3081" id="noteref-3081" epub:type="noteref">3081</a> to his fellow low,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And said, “He lies; for it is rather like</span>
						<br/>
						<span>An ápparéncë made by some magíc,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As jugglers playen at these feastës great.”</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of sundry doubts they jangle thus and treat.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As lewëd<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3082" id="noteref-3082" epub:type="noteref">3082</a> people deemë commonly</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of thingës that be made more subtilly</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than they can in their lew’dness comprehend;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They deemë gladly to the badder end.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3083" id="noteref-3083" epub:type="noteref">3083</a></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And some of them wonder’d on the mirroúr,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That borne was up into the master tow’r,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3084" id="noteref-3084" epub:type="noteref">3084</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>How men might in it suchë thingës see.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Another answér’d and said, it might well be</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Naturallý by compositións</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of angles, and of sly reflectións;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And saidë that in Rome was such a one.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They speak of Alhazen and Vitellon,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3085" id="noteref-3085" epub:type="noteref">3085</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Aristotle, that wrote in their lives</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of quaintë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3086" id="noteref-3086" epub:type="noteref">3086</a> mirrors, and of próspectives,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As knowë they that have their bookës heard.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And other folk have wonder’d on the swerd,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That wouldë piercë throughout every thing;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And fell in speech of Telephus the king,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And of Achilles for his quaintë spear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For he could with it bothë heal and dere,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3087" id="noteref-3087" epub:type="noteref">3087</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Right in such wise as men may with the swerd</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of which right now ye have yourselvës heard.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They spake of sundry hard’ning of metál,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And spake of medicínës therewithal,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And how, and when, it shouldë harden’d be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which is unknowen algate<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3088" id="noteref-3088" epub:type="noteref">3088</a> unto me.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then spakë they of Canacéë’s ring,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And saiden all, that such a wondrous thing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of craft of ringës heard they never none,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Save that he, Moses, and King Solomon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hadden a name of conning<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3089" id="noteref-3089" epub:type="noteref">3089</a> in such art.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thus said the people, and drew them apart.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Put natheless some saidë that it was</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wonder to maken of fern ashes glass,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And yet is glass nought like ashes of fern;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, for<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3090" id="noteref-3090" epub:type="noteref">3090</a> they have y-knowen it so ferne,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3091" id="noteref-3091" epub:type="noteref">3091</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Therefore ceaseth their jangling and their wonder.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As sorë wonder some on cause of thunder,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>On ebb and flood, on gossamer and mist,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And on all thing, till that the cause is wist.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3092" id="noteref-3092" epub:type="noteref">3092</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thus jangle they, and deemen and devise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till that the king gan from his board arise.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Phoebus had left the angle meridional,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And yet ascending was the beast royál,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The gentle Lion, with his Aldrian,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3093" id="noteref-3093" epub:type="noteref">3093</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>When that this Tartar king, this Cambuscan,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Rose from the board, there as he sat full high:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Before him went the loudë minstrelsy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till he came to his chamber of parëments,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3094" id="noteref-3094" epub:type="noteref">3094</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>There as they sounded diverse instruments,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That it was like a heaven for to hear.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now danced lusty Venus’ children dear:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For in the Fish<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3095" id="noteref-3095" epub:type="noteref">3095</a> their lady sat full high,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And looked on them with a friendly eye.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This noble king is set upon his throne;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This strangë knight is fetched to him full sone,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3096" id="noteref-3096" epub:type="noteref">3096</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And on the dance he goes with Canacé.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Here is the revel and the jollity,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That is not able a dull man to devise:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3097" id="noteref-3097" epub:type="noteref">3097</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>He must have knowen love and his servíce,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And been a feastly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3098" id="noteref-3098" epub:type="noteref">3098</a> man, as fresh as May,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That shouldë you devisë such array.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who couldë tellë you the form of dances</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So úncouth,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3099" id="noteref-3099" epub:type="noteref">3099</a> and so freshë countenances,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3100" id="noteref-3100" epub:type="noteref">3100</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such subtle lookings and dissimulances,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For dread of jealous men’s appérceivíngs?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No man but Launcelot,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3101" id="noteref-3101" epub:type="noteref">3101</a> and he is dead.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Therefore I pass o’er all this lustihead;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3102" id="noteref-3102" epub:type="noteref">3102</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>I say no more, but in this jolliness</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I leave them, till to supper men them dress.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The steward bids the spices for to hie<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3103" id="noteref-3103" epub:type="noteref">3103</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And eke the wine, in all this melodý;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The ushers and the squiërs be y-gone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The spices and the wine is come anon;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They eat and drink, and when this hath an end,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unto the temple, as reason was, they wend;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The service done, they suppen all by day.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What needeth you rehearsë their array?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Each man wot well, that at a kingë’s feast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is plenty, to the most<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3104" id="noteref-3104" epub:type="noteref">3104</a> and to the least,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And dainties more than be in my knowíng.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>At after supper went this noble king</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To see the horse of brass, with all a rout</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of lordës and of ladies him about.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such wond’ring was there on this horse of brass,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That, since the greatë siege of Troyë was,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There as men wonder’d on a horse also,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ne’er was there such a wond’ring as was tho.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3105" id="noteref-3105" epub:type="noteref">3105</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>But finally the king asked the knight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The virtue of this courser, and the might,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And prayed him to tell his governance.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3106" id="noteref-3106" epub:type="noteref">3106</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>The horse anon began to trip and dance,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When that the knight laid hand upon his rein,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And saidë, “Sir, there is no more to sayn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But when you list to riden anywhere,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ye mustë trill<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3107" id="noteref-3107" epub:type="noteref">3107</a> a pin, stands in his ear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which I shall tellë you betwixt us two;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ye mustë name him to what place also,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or to what country that you list to ride.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when ye comë where you list abide,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Bid him descend, and trill another pin</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(For therein lies th’ effect of all the gin<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3108" id="noteref-3108" epub:type="noteref">3108</a>),</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And he will down descend and do your will,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in that place he will abidë still;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though all the world had the contráry swore,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He shall not thence be throwen nor be bore.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or, if you list to bid him thennës gon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Trill this pin, and he will vanísh anon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Out of the sight of every manner wight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And come again, be it by day or night,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When that you list to clepë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3109" id="noteref-3109" epub:type="noteref">3109</a> him again</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In such a guise, as I shall to you sayn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Betwixtë you and me, and that full soon.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ride<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3110" id="noteref-3110" epub:type="noteref">3110</a> when you list, there is no more to do’n.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Informed when the king was of the knight,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And had conceived in his wit aright</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The manner and the form of all this thing,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Full glad and blithe, this noble doughty king</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Repaired to his revel as beforn.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The bridle is into the tower borne,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And kept among his jewels lefe<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3111" id="noteref-3111" epub:type="noteref">3111</a> and dear;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The horse vanish’d, I n’ot<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3112" id="noteref-3112" epub:type="noteref">3112</a> in what mannére,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Out of their sight; ye get no more of me:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But thus I leave in lust and jollitý</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This Cambuscan his lordës feastying,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3113" id="noteref-3113" epub:type="noteref">3113</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Until well nigh the day began to spring.</span>
					</p>
				</section>
				<section id="the-squires-tale-body-2" epub:type="part">
					<h4 xml:lang="la">
						<span epub:type="label">Pars</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal">Secunda</span>
					</h4>
					<p>
						<span>The norice<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3114" id="noteref-3114" epub:type="noteref">3114</a> of digestión, the sleep,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gan on them wink, and bade them takë keep,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3115" id="noteref-3115" epub:type="noteref">3115</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>That muchë mirth and labour will have rest:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with a gaping<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3116" id="noteref-3116" epub:type="noteref">3116</a> mouth he all them kest,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3117" id="noteref-3117" epub:type="noteref">3117</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And said, that it was timë to lie down,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For blood was in his dominatioún:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Cherish the blood,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3118" id="noteref-3118" epub:type="noteref">3118</a> natúrë’s friend,” quoth he.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They thanked him gaping, by two and three;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And every wight gan draw him to his rest;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As sleep them bade, they took it for the best.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Their dreamës shall not now be told for me;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Full are their headës of fumosity,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3119" id="noteref-3119" epub:type="noteref">3119</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>That caused dreams of which there is no charge.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3120" id="noteref-3120" epub:type="noteref">3120</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>They sleptë till that, it was primë large,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3121" id="noteref-3121" epub:type="noteref">3121</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>The mostë part, but<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3122" id="noteref-3122" epub:type="noteref">3122</a> it was Canacé;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She was full measuráble,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3123" id="noteref-3123" epub:type="noteref">3123</a> as women be.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For of her father had she ta’en her leave,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To go to rest, soon after it was eve;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her listë not appalled<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3124" id="noteref-3124" epub:type="noteref">3124</a> for to be,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor on the morrow unfeastly for to see;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3125" id="noteref-3125" epub:type="noteref">3125</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And slept her firstë sleep, and then awoke.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For such a joy she in her heartë took</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Both of her quaintë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3126" id="noteref-3126" epub:type="noteref">3126</a> a ring and her mirroúr,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That twenty times she changed her coloúr;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in her sleep, right for th’ impressión</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of her mirrór, she had a visión.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wherefore, ere that the sunnë gan up glide,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She call’d upon her mistress’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3127" id="noteref-3127" epub:type="noteref">3127</a> her beside,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And saidë, that her listë for to rise.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>These oldë women, that be gladly wise,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As are her mistresses, answér’d anon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And said; “Madamë, whither will ye gon</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thus early? for the folk be all in rest.”</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“I will,” quoth she, “arisë, for me lest</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No longer for to sleep, and walk about.”</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her mistresses call’d women a great rout,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And up they rosë, well a ten or twelve;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Up rosë freshë Canacé herselve,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As ruddy and bright as is the youngë sun</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That in the Ram is four degrees y-run;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No higher was he, when she ready was;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And forth she walked easily a pace,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Array’d after the lusty<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3128" id="noteref-3128" epub:type="noteref">3128</a> season swoot,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3129" id="noteref-3129" epub:type="noteref">3129</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Lightëly for to play, and walk on foot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nought but with five or six of her meinie;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3130" id="noteref-3130" epub:type="noteref">3130</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in a trench<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3131" id="noteref-3131" epub:type="noteref">3131</a> forth in the park went she.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The vapour, which up from the earthë glode,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3132" id="noteref-3132" epub:type="noteref">3132</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Made the sun to seem ruddy and broad:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But, natheless, it was so fair a sight</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That it made all their heartës for to light,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3133" id="noteref-3133" epub:type="noteref">3133</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>What for the season and the morrowning,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And for the fowlës that she heardë sing.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For right anon she wistë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3134" id="noteref-3134" epub:type="noteref">3134</a> what they meant</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Right by their song, and knew all their intent.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The knottë,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3135" id="noteref-3135" epub:type="noteref">3135</a> why that every tale is told,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If it be tarried<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3136" id="noteref-3136" epub:type="noteref">3136</a> till the lust<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3137" id="noteref-3137" epub:type="noteref">3137</a> be cold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of them that have it hearken’d after yore,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3138" id="noteref-3138" epub:type="noteref">3138</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>The savour passeth ever longer more,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For fulsomness of the prolixitý:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And by that samë reason thinketh me</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I should unto the knottë condescend,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And maken of her walking soon an end.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Amid a tree fordry,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3139" id="noteref-3139" epub:type="noteref">3139</a> as white as chalk,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As Canacé was playing in her walk,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There sat a falcon o’er her head full high,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That with a piteous voice so gan to cry;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That all the wood resounded of her cry,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And beat she had herself so piteouslý</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With both her wingës, till the reddë blood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ran endëlong<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3140" id="noteref-3140" epub:type="noteref">3140</a> the tree, there as she stood.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And ever-in-one<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3141" id="noteref-3141" epub:type="noteref">3141</a> alway she cried and shright,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3142" id="noteref-3142" epub:type="noteref">3142</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with her beak herselfë she so pight,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3143" id="noteref-3143" epub:type="noteref">3143</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>That there is no tiger, nor cruel beast,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That dwelleth either in wood or in forést;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But would have wept, if that he weepë could,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For sorrow of her, she shriek’d alway so loud.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For there was never yet no man alive,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If that he could a falcon well descrive;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3144" id="noteref-3144" epub:type="noteref">3144</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>That heard of such another of fairnéss</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As well of plumage, as of gentleness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of shape, of all that mightë reckon’d be.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A falcon peregrinë seemed she,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of fremdë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3145" id="noteref-3145" epub:type="noteref">3145</a> land; and ever as she stood</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She swooned now and now for lack of blood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till well-nigh is she fallen from the tree.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>This fairë kingë’s daughter Canacé,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That on her finger bare the quaintë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3146" id="noteref-3146" epub:type="noteref">3146</a> ring,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Through which she understood well every thing</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That any fowl may in his leden<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3147" id="noteref-3147" epub:type="noteref">3147</a> sayn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And could him answer in his leden again,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Hath understoodë what this falcon said,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And well-nigh for the ruth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3148" id="noteref-3148" epub:type="noteref">3148</a> almost she died;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to the tree she went, full hastily,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And on this falcon looked piteously,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And held her lap abroad, for well she wist</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The falcon mustë fallë from the twist<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3149" id="noteref-3149" epub:type="noteref">3149</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>When that she swooned next, for lack of blood.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A longë while to waitë her she stood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till at the last she apake in this mannére</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unto the hawk, as ye shall after hear.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“What is the cause, if it be for to tell,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That ye be in this furial<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3150" id="noteref-3150" epub:type="noteref">3150</a> pain of hell?”</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quoth Canacé unto this hawk above;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Is this for sorrow of death, or loss of love?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For, as I trow,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3151" id="noteref-3151" epub:type="noteref">3151</a> these be the causes two,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That causë most a gentle heartë woe.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of other harm it needeth not to speak.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For ye yourself upon yourself awreak;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3152" id="noteref-3152" epub:type="noteref">3152</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which proveth well, that either ire or dread<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3153" id="noteref-3153" epub:type="noteref">3153</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Must be occasion of your cruel deed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Since that I see none other wight you chase.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For love of God, as do yourselfë grace,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3154" id="noteref-3154" epub:type="noteref">3154</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Or what may be your help? for, west nor east,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I never saw ere now no bird nor beast</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That fared with himself so piteously.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ye slay me with your sorrow verily,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I have of you so great compassioún.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For Goddë’s love come from the tree adown;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, as I am a kingë’s daughter true,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If that I verily the causes knew</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of your disease,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3155" id="noteref-3155" epub:type="noteref">3155</a> if it lay in my might,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I would amend it, ere that it were night,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So wisly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3156" id="noteref-3156" epub:type="noteref">3156</a> help me the great God of kind.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3157" id="noteref-3157" epub:type="noteref">3157</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And herbës shall I right enoughë find,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To healë with your hurtës hastily.”</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then shriek’d this falcon yet more piteously</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Than ever she did, and fell to ground anon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And lay aswoon, as dead as lies a stone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till Canacé had in her lap her take,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Unto that time she gan of swoon awake:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And, after that she out of swoon abraid,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3158" id="noteref-3158" epub:type="noteref">3158</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Right in her hawkë’s leden thus she said:</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“That pity runneth soon in gentle heart</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(Feeling his simil’tude in painë’s smart),</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Is proved every day, as men may see,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As well by work as by authority;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3159" id="noteref-3159" epub:type="noteref">3159</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>For gentle heartë kitheth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3160" id="noteref-3160" epub:type="noteref">3160</a> gentleness.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I see well, that ye have on my distress</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Compassión, my fairë Canacé,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of very womanly benignity</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That nature in your princples hath set.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But for no hopë for to fare the bet,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3161" id="noteref-3161" epub:type="noteref">3161</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>But for t’ obey unto your heartë free,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And for to make others aware by me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As by the whelp chastis’d<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3162" id="noteref-3162" epub:type="noteref">3162</a> is the lión,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Right for that cause and that conclusión,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>While that I have a leisure and a space,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mine harm I will confessen ere I pace.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3163" id="noteref-3163" epub:type="noteref">3163</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And ever while the one her sorrow told,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The other wept, as she to water wo’ld,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3164" id="noteref-3164" epub:type="noteref">3164</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till that the falcon bade her to be still,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with a sigh right thus she said her till:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3165" id="noteref-3165" epub:type="noteref">3165</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Where I was bred (alas that ilkë<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3166" id="noteref-3166" epub:type="noteref">3166</a> day!)</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And foster’d in a rock of marble gray</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So tenderly, that nothing ailed me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I wistë not what was adversitý,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till I could flee full high under the sky.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then dwell’d a tercëlet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3167" id="noteref-3167" epub:type="noteref">3167</a> me fastë by,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That seem’d a well of allë gentleness;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All were he<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3168" id="noteref-3168" epub:type="noteref">3168</a> full of treason and falsenéss,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>It was so wrapped under humble cheer,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3169" id="noteref-3169" epub:type="noteref">3169</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And under hue of truth, in such mannére,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Under pleasánce, and under busy pain,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That no wight weened that he couldë feign,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So deep in grain he dyed his coloúrs.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Right as a serpent hides him under flow’rs,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till he may see his timë for to bite,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Right so this god of lovë’s hypocrite</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Did so his ceremonies and obeisánces,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And kept in semblance all his óbservánces,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That sounden unto<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3170" id="noteref-3170" epub:type="noteref">3170</a> gentleness of love.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As on a tomb is all the fair above,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And under is the corpse, which that ye wot,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such was this hypocrite, both cold and hot;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And in this wise he served his intent,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That, save the fiend, none wistë what he meant:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till he so long had weeped and complain’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And many a year his service to me feign’d,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till that mine heart, too piteous and too nice,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3171" id="noteref-3171" epub:type="noteref">3171</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>All innocent of his crowned malíce,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forfeared of his death,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3172" id="noteref-3172" epub:type="noteref">3172</a> as thoughtë me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Upon his oathës and his surëtý</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Granted him love, on this conditioún,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That evermore mine honour and renown</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Were saved, bothë privy and apert;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3173" id="noteref-3173" epub:type="noteref">3173</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>This is to say, that, after his desert,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I gave him all my heart and all my thought</span>
						<br/>
						<span>(God wot, and he, that other wayës nought<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3174" id="noteref-3174" epub:type="noteref">3174</a>),</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And took his heart in change of mine for aye.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But sooth is said, gone since many a day,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A true wight and a thiefë think not one.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3175" id="noteref-3175" epub:type="noteref">3175</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And when he saw the thing so far y-gone,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I had granted him fully my love,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In such a wise as I have said above,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And given him my truë heart as free</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As he swore that he gave his heart to me,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Anon this tiger, full of doubleness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Fell on his knees with so great humbleness,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With so high reverence, as by his cheer,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3176" id="noteref-3176" epub:type="noteref">3176</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>So like a gentle lover in mannére,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So ravish’d, as it seemed, for the joy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That never Jason, nor París of Troy⁠—</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Jason? certes, nor ever other man,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Since Lamech was, that alderfirst<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3177" id="noteref-3177" epub:type="noteref">3177</a> began</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To lovë two, as writë folk beforn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor ever since the firstë man was born,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Couldë no man, by twenty thousand part,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Counterfeit the sophimës<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3178" id="noteref-3178" epub:type="noteref">3178</a> of his art;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor worthy were t’ unbuckle his galoche,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3179" id="noteref-3179" epub:type="noteref">3179</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Where doubleness of feigning should approach,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor could so thank a wight, as he did me.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His manner was a heaven for to see</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To any woman, were she ne’er so wise;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So painted he and kempt,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3180" id="noteref-3180" epub:type="noteref">3180</a> at point devise,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3181" id="noteref-3181" epub:type="noteref">3181</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>As well his wordës as his countenánce.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And I so lov’d him for his obeisánce,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And for the truth I deemed in his heart,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That, if so were that any thing him smart,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3182" id="noteref-3182" epub:type="noteref">3182</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>All were it ne’er so lite,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3183" id="noteref-3183" epub:type="noteref">3183</a> and I it wist,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Methought I felt death at my heartë twist.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And shortly, so farforth this thing is went,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3184" id="noteref-3184" epub:type="noteref">3184</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>That my will was his willë’s instrumént;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That is to say, my will obey’d his will</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In allë thing, as far as reason fill,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3185" id="noteref-3185" epub:type="noteref">3185</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Keeping the boundës of my worship ever;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And never had I thing so lefe, or lever,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3186" id="noteref-3186" epub:type="noteref">3186</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>As him, God wot, nor never shall no mo’.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>“This lasted longer than a year or two,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I supposed of him naught but good.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But finally, thus at the last it stood,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That fortune wouldë that he mustë twin<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3187" id="noteref-3187" epub:type="noteref">3187</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Out of that placë which that I was in.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whe’er<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3188" id="noteref-3188" epub:type="noteref">3188</a> me was woe, it is no questión;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I cannot make of it descriptión.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For one thing dare I tellë boldëly,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I know what is the pain of death thereby;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Such harm I felt, for he might not byleve.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3189" id="noteref-3189" epub:type="noteref">3189</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>So on a day of me he took his leave,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So sorrowful eke, that I ween’d verily,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That he had felt as muchë harm as I,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When that I heard him speak, and saw his hue.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But natheless, I thought he was so true,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And eke that he repairë should again</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Within a little whilë, sooth to sayn,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And reason would eke that he mustë go</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For his honoúr, as often happ’neth so,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That I made virtue of necessitý,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And took it well, since that it mustë be.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As I best might, I hid from him my sorrow,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And took him by the hand, Saint John to borrow,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3190" id="noteref-3190" epub:type="noteref">3190</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And said him thus; ‘Lo, I am yourës all;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be such as I have been to you, and shall.’</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What he answér’d, it needs not to rehearse;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Who can say bet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3191" id="noteref-3191" epub:type="noteref">3191</a> than he, who can do worse?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When he had all well said, then had he done.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Therefore behoveth him a full long spoon,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That shall eat with a fiend; thus heard I say.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So at the last he mustë forth his way,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And forth he flew, till he came where him lest.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When it came him to purpose for to rest,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I trow that he had thilkë text in mind,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That allë thing repairing to his kind</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Gladdeth himself;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3192" id="noteref-3192" epub:type="noteref">3192</a> thus say men, as I guess;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Men love of [proper] kind newfangleness,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3193" id="noteref-3193" epub:type="noteref">3193</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>As birdës do, that men in cages feed.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For though thou night and day take of them heed,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And strew their cagë fair and soft as silk,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And give them sugar, honey, bread, and milk,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Yet, right anon as that his door is up,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3194" id="noteref-3194" epub:type="noteref">3194</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>He with his feet will spurnë down his cup,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And to the wood he will, and wormës eat;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So newëfangle be they of their meat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And love novelties, of proper kind;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No gentleness of bloodë may them bind.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>So far’d this tercëlet, alas the day!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Though he were gentle born, and fresh, and gay,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And goodly for to see, and humble, and free,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>He saw upon a time a kitë flee,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And suddenly he loved this kite so,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That all his love is clean from me y-go:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And hath his trothë falsed in this wise.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thus hath the kite my love in her servíce,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And I am lorn<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3195" id="noteref-3195" epub:type="noteref">3195</a> withoutë remedy.”</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>And with that word this falcon gan to cry,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And swooned eft<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3196" id="noteref-3196" epub:type="noteref">3196</a> in Canacéë’s barme.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3197" id="noteref-3197" epub:type="noteref">3197</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Great was the sorrow, for that hawkë’s harm,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That Canacé and all her women made;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>They wist not how they might the falcon glade.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3198" id="noteref-3198" epub:type="noteref">3198</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>But Canacé home bare her in her lap,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And softëly in plasters gan her wrap,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>There as she with her beak had hurt herselve.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Now cannot Canacé but herbës delve</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Out of the ground, and makë salvës new</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Of herbës precioús and fine of hue,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To healë with this hawk; from day to night</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She did her business, and all her might.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And by her beddë’s head she made a mew,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3199" id="noteref-3199" epub:type="noteref">3199</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>And cover’d it with velouettës blue,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3200" id="noteref-3200" epub:type="noteref">3200</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>In sign of truth that is in woman seen;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And all without the mew is painted green,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In which were painted all these falsë fowls,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>As be these tidifes,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3201" id="noteref-3201" epub:type="noteref">3201</a> tercëlets, and owls;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And piës, on them for to cry and chide,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Right for despite were painted them beside.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span>Thus leave I Canacé her hawk keeping.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I will no more as now speak of her ring,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till it come eft<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3202" id="noteref-3202" epub:type="noteref">3202</a> to purpose for to sayn</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How that this falcon got her love again</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Repentant, as the story telleth us,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By mediatión of Camballus,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The kingë’s son of which that I you told.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But hencëforth I will my process hold</span>
						<br/>
						<span>To speak of áventures, and of battailes,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That yet was never heard so great marvailles.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>First I will tellë you of Cambuscan,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>That in his timë many a city wan;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And after will I speak of Algarsife,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How he won Theodora to his wife,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For whom full oft in great períl he was,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>N’ had he<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3203" id="noteref-3203" epub:type="noteref">3203</a> been holpen by the horse of brass.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And after will I speak of Camballó,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3204" id="noteref-3204" epub:type="noteref">3204</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>That fought in listës with the brethren two</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For Canacé, ere that he might her win;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And where I left I will again begin.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="elision">⋮</span>
					</p>
				</section>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
